Importance of hepatitis B serological markers

¢ Hepatitis B virus surface glycoproteins

Detectable during acute infection

HBsAg
¢ Persistence >6 months = chronic
infection
¢ Hepatitis B virus polypeptide
¢ Detectable during acute infection
HBeAg . . oo.
¢ Indicates ¢ viral replication &
infectivity
¢ Detectable during acute infection
Anti-HBc
‘ene ¢ Present during window phase
g

(between HBsAg & anti-HBs)

Seen with cleared infection or
Anti-HBs vaccination

Confers long-term immunity

Develops in cleared infection & later in

chronic infection
Anti-HBe

Indicates | viral replication &
infectivity

Present in both acute & chronic

Anti-HBc
IgG

infection

Not present after vaccination

3.
Serologic evidence of hepatitis B virus (HBV) exposure is present in ~2 billion people
worldwide. Perinatal transmission is most common in high-incidence areas (eg, sub-Saharan
Africa). In low-prevalence countries such as the United States, Western Europe, and Canada,
most cases arise due to unsafe sexual practices or injection drug use.
4.
Serological markers for HBV can be used to distinguish between acute infection, chronic
infection, and a protective vaccination response. Acute HBV infection is marked by the
proliferation of the virus in hepatocytes with the release of viral antigens (HBsAg, HBeAg) and
HBV DNA into the bloodstream and the generation of IgM against HB core antigen. Many
patients with acute infection will have subclinical, anicteric disease, but approximately 30%
develop several weeks or months of jaundice, fatigue, hepatomegaly, and elevated
transaminases.

Most adults with HBV clear the virus and generate protective immunity against future
infection. This is reflected serologically by the following progression:

1. Anti-HBe antibodies develop 3-6 months after initial infection and are associated with the
elimination of HBeAg. This correlates with reduced viral replication and infectivity.

2. HBsAg is eliminated around the time that HBeAg becomes undetectable.

3. Anti-HBsAg antibodies form several weeks/months later and provide protective
immunity against future infection.
