3.

Serum antibody tier
Fy
@

Serum antibody tier

Primary Secondary

IgM

t T T TT > t T T T T ued

0 5 10 15 20 25 0 5 10 15 20 25

Days from first exposure Days from reexposure
to antigen to same antigen

Although B cells are the primary players in inducing a vaccine response, T cells play a key

role in enabling high-affinity antibodies and immunological memory. Most vaccinations use
peptide antigens or nonpeptides bonded to peptides (ie, conjugate vaccine) so the antigen can
be displayed on MHC class II molecules on antigen-presenting cells (APCs), which leads to a
much stronger T-cell-mediated immune response.

Vaccines given in series (eg, measles, mumps, and rubella) typically trigger the following

immunologic changes:

¢ Primary response: Upon initial vaccination, foreign antigen binds to and activates B
lymphocytes with compatible antigen receptors, leading to clonal B-cell expansion and
differentiation into short-lived plasma cells that secrete low-affinity IgM. Early
production of IgM can be detected in the serum within a few days of immunization. APCs
also ingest the peptide and travel to regional lymph nodes where they stimulate CD4 T
lymphocytes to interact with activated B cells. This interaction facilitates immunoglobulin
class switching from IgM to other types (eg, IgG, IgA) and stimulates B-cell differentiation
into memory B cells. Plasma cells secrete high-affinity IgG, and levels peak a few weeks
after immunization (after IgM peaks) before slowly waning (Choices B and E).

Secondary response: subsequent vaccination or pathogen exposure results in a IgM
response similar to initial vaccination due to stimulation of antigen-specific naive B
lymphocytes. However, the previously formed memory B cells quickly differentiate into
long-lasting plasma cells to produce a rapid and sustained IgG response that peaks
around the same time as the IgM response but is greater in magnitude (Choices C and
D). IgG rapidly neutralizes invading organisms and is responsible for the protective effects

of the vaccine.

Educational objective:

Initial vaccination generates an early IgM response by short-lived plasma cells followed by a

delayed-onset, longer-lasting IgG response due to T-cell dependent class switching (IgM

peaks before IgG). Due to formation of memory B cells, secondary responses (eg, booster

vaccination, pathogen exposure) are characterized by a rapid and sustained IgG response

with a short-term, more muted IgM response.
