Wernicke encephalopathy

é ¢ Chronic alcohol use (most common)
Risk factors
¢ Malnutrition (eg, anorexia, gastric bypass surgery)

Thiamine deficiency — impaired glucose metabolism & ATP

. production — neuronal injury/death (eg, mammillary bodies)
Pathophysiology . . |
e May be precipitated by high metabolic demand or high glucose

load
. ¢ Encephalopathy
Clinical |
= ¢ Oculomotor dysfunction
findings :
e Ataxia
¢ Thiamine infusion reverses most symptoms.
Management

: Memory impairment may be chronic/irreversible (Korsakoff
& prognosis
syndrome).

This patient's autopsy shows foci of hemorrhage and necrosis in the mammillary bodies and
periaqueductal gray matter, findings characteristic of Wernicke encephalopathy. This
condition classically presents with the triad of ophthalmoplegia, ataxia, and confusion but can
lead to coma and death if untreated. Wernicke encephalopathy occurs due to chronic thiamine
deficiency, which is common in patients with alcohol use disorder.

Thiamine (vitamin B,) participates in glucose metabolism and is a cofactor for the following

enzymes:

¢ Pyruvate dehydrogenase, which converts pyruvate (glycolysis end product) into acetyl-
CoA, which then enters the citric acid cycle

e Alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, an enzyme of the citric acid cycle

¢ Branched-chain alpha-ketoacid dehydrogenase, which is essential for the catabolism of
branched-chain amino acids (eg, leucine, isoleucine, valine)

¢ Transketolase, an enzyme of the pentose phosphate pathway that helps convert ribulose-
5-phosphate (derived from glucose) to glycolysis intermediates (eg, glyceraldehyde-3-
phosphate)

Therefore, thiamine deficiency impairs glucose utilization, which can have catastrophic
effects on the CNS as the brain always requires some glucose.

Thiamine deficiency is often diagnosed clinically in patients with a history of heavy alcohol use
or malnutrition and signs of Wernicke encephalopathy; the diagnosis can be confirmed with a
baseline erythrocyte transketolase activity that is low but increases after the addition of
thiamine pyrophosphate. Treatment involves thiamine supplementation with glucose; glucose
administration alone may precipitate or worsen Wernicke encephalopathy due to rapid
thiamine consumption.

Educational objective:

Chronic thiamine (vitamin B,) deficiency impairs glucose use, particularly in mammillary
bodies, as seen in Wernicke encephalopathy. This occurs due to decreased activity of the
enzymes that use thiamine as a cofactor (eg, transketolase). Low erythrocyte transketolase
activity that increases after the addition of thiamine pyrophosphate is diagnostic.

Pentose phosphate pathway

OXIDATIVE

Glucose-6-phosphate
(IRREVERSIBLE)

NADP’—\ | Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase

) (rate-limiting step)
NADPH <—~
“Cholesterol & fatty 4
maa etal 6-phosphogluconate
+ Glutathione antioxidant .
NADP
moe x, ~~) 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase
NADPH <—~

Ribulose-5-phosphate

NONOXIDATIVE
(REVERSIBLE) Ribulose-5-phosphate

i,
Xylulose-5-phosphate Ribose-5-phosphate—> cyanea
ome
Sedoheptulose-7-phosphate Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
Erythrose-4-phosphate NG Fructose-6-phosphate

Y
©uWorld Glycolysis
