1.

This patient underwent cytotoxic chemotherapy and subsequently developed a bloodstream
infection with Candida albicans, a small, elliptical, budding yeast. Visualization of
pseudohyphae, a chain of budding yeasts joined together with end-to-end at constrictions, is
an important diagnostic clue. C albicans is distinguished from other Candida species by its
ability to form germ tubes (true hyphae with no constrictions) when incubated at 37 C (98.6 F)
for 2-3 hours (ie, germ tube test).

2.

C albicans is a human commensal organism that may cause mucocutaneous infection in
otherwise healthy individuals but rarely causes invasive disease. Protection against infection
is mediated by the following:

¢ Intact epithelium: Candida triggers toll-like receptors on epithelial cells to release
proinflammatory cytokines, which recruit immune cells to the area; epithelial cells also
release beta-defensins, which provide antifungal activity.

Resident macrophages/monocytes: Penetration of epithelial cells by fungal hyphae
causes resident macrophages to release inflammatory cytokines that recruit lymphocytes,
monocytes, and neutrophils to the area of infection. T helper lymphocytes specific for
Candida antigens help drive the epithelial and macrophage response, and are important
for prevention of superficial Candida infection (eg, oral/esophageal, cutaneous,
vulvovaginitis).

Neutrophils: Neutrophils are the most important immune cell in the protection against
invasive Candida (eg, candidemia, deep tissue infections). Neutrophils kill Candida by
releasing reactive oxygen species, lactoferrin, lysozyme, elastase, and beta-defensins.
They are also the only immune cell that is able to prevent germination of Candida yeasts
into penetrating hyphae.
3.
Patients who undergo cytotoxic chemotherapy and develop neutropenia are at dramatically
increased risk for invasive infection. Indwelling central intravascular catheters are also a majo
risk factor for invasive disease.
4.
Educational objective:
Neutrophils are the most important immune cell in the defense against invasive Candida
infection; therefore, patients with neutropenia (eg, following cytotoxic chemotherapy) are at
high risk for invasive disease (eg, candidemia, meningitis). In contrast, T lymphocytes are
more important for prevention of superficial, mucocutaneous infection (eg, thrush).
