The two primary modes of cell death are necrosis (which is induced by injury) and apoptosis
(which is initiated by the host organism in response to cell damage, age-related atrophy, or
specific stages of embryogenesis). Apoptosis is helpful in the elimination of cells that are no
longer necessary and in the maintenance of a constant number of cells in rapidly growing
tissues. Tumor cells, for example, die by apoptosis. The death of B and T lymphocytes and
virally-infected cells also occurs through apoptosis. The remains of cells that die by this
method are phagocytized by macrophages.

2.

The process of apoptosis involves the following steps:

1. Initiation: Apoptosis is triggered by different stimuli and can occur through either the
intrinsic, mitochondria-mediated pathway or the extrinsic, receptor-initiated pathway. Cells
damaged by ultraviolet light, heat, hypoxia, toxins, or radiation display intrinsic apoptotic
signals (eg, phosphatidylserine or thrombospondin) on their plasma membranes. Extrinsic
apoptosis, in contrast, is induced by the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) when bound to tumor
necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR71) or the Fas ligand when bound to cell surface receptor
Fas.

2. Control: Intrinsic apoptosis is mediated by a group of bcl-2 proteins. Some of the
components of this system are pro-apoptotic (eg, Bak, Bax, and Bim proteins), while
others are anti-apoptotic (eg, Bcl-x and Bcl-2 proteins). Apoptotic signals tip the balance
between these two forces, resulting in changes of the inner mitochondrial membrane.
These changes are responsible for the formation of the mitochondrial permeability
transition (MPT) and the release of cytochrome c and other pro-apoptotic proteins into the
cytoplasm, which then activate caspases. In extrinsic apoptosis, the binding of the death
ligand and the death receptor allows for pro-caspase molecules to be brought into close
proximity.

3.

3. Destruction: Both the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways converge at this step, resulting in
caspase activation. Caspases are proteolytic enzymes that destroy cell components.
They contain cysteine and are able to cleave aspartic acid residues (cysteine-aspartic-
acid-proteases). The eleven caspases that have been identified are classified as either
initiator or effector caspases. Initiator caspases activate the effector caspases, which then
cleave the cellular proteins.
