Chagas disease is a vector-borne protozoan illness endemic to most Latin American
countries. Risk is greatest in those with long-term domestic exposure to the Triatomine bug,
which nests in thatched roofing and the cracks of adobe or unfinished brick. Transmission
occurs when the bug feeds on human blood during the night and defecates the underlying
pathogen, Trypanosoma cruzi, into the bite wound.

2.
Chagas disease is divided into 2 phases:
¢ The acute phase (8-12 weeks after transmission) is characterized by circulating
trypomastigotes that are detectable on blood microscopy. Most patients are
asymptomatic, but a minority develop nonspecific symptoms (eg, fever, malaise, anorexia)
and inflammation/swelling at the site of inoculation (eg, eye swelling following conjunctival
inoculation).

The chronic phase begins when the immune system eliminates circulating parasitemia,
leading to resolution of acute symptoms. Patients subsequently develop a prolonged
asymptomatic phase ("indeterminate form"), whereby serology is positive for T cruzi, but
there are no symptoms, signs, detectable parasitemia, or indications of end-organ
damage. After 1-3 decades, a minority of those with asymptomatic chronic infection
develop end-organ disease of the heart or gastrointestinal system.

3.
Chronic Chagas cardiomyopathy is the most common complication of Chagas disease. It is

thought to be caused by chronic, low-grade, parasite-mediated myocarditis, which leads to the
progressive destruction of cardiac fibers and subsequent cardiac fibrosis. Common
complications include biventricular heart failure, cardiac arrhythmias (particularly ventricular
arrhythmias), and ventricular aneurysm with intracardiac thrombus (leads to thromboembolic
disease/stroke).

4.
Educational objective:

Chagas disease is a protozoal illness that is endemic to Latin America. Patients in rural areas
are at greatest risk when their houses harbor the vector (Triatome bug) in adobe walls or
thatched roofs. Acute infections are often asymptomatic, but patients can develop Chagas
cardiomyopathy (eg, heart failure, ventricular arrhythmias, ventricular aneurysms) several
decades later.
