PRECLINICAL
IMMUNOLOGY
AND
MICROBIOLOGY
REVIEW
2023
®
FOR USMLE STEP 1 AND
®
COMLEX USA LEVEL 1
USMLE® and United States Medical Licensing Examination® is ajoint program of the National Board of Medical Examiners (NBME) and
the Federation ofState Medical Boards (FSMB), which are not affiliated with Kaplan and were not involved inthe production of, and
do not endorse, this product. COMLEX USA® is aregistered trademark of the National Board of Osteopathic Medical Examiners, Inc
(NBOME), which is not affiliated with Kaplan and was not involved in the production of, and does not endorse, this product.
PRECLINICAL
IMMUNOLOGY
AND
MICROBIOLOGY
REVIEW
2023
FOR USMLE® STEP 1 AND
COMLEX USA® LEVEL 1
USMLE® and United States Medical Licensing Examination® is ajoint program of the National Board of Medical Examiners (NBME) and the Federation
of State Medical Boards (FSMB), which are not affiliated with Kaplan and were not involved in the production of, and do not endorse, this product.
COMLEX USA® isaregistered trademark ofthe National Board ofOsteopathic Medical Examiners, Inc. (NBOME), which is not affiliated with Kaplan an
was not involved inthe production of,and does not endorse, this product.
USMLE® and United States Medical Licensing Examination® is a joint program of the National Board of Medical Examiners
(NBME) and the Federation of State Medical Boards (FSMB), which are not affiliated with Kaplan and were not involved in
the production of, and do not endorse, this product.
COMLEX USA® is a registered trademark of the National Board of Osteopathic Medical Examiners, Inc. (NBOME), which is
not affiliated with Kaplan and was not involved in the production of, and does not endorse, this product.
This publication is designed to provide accurate information in regard to the subject matter covered as of its publication
date, with the understanding that knowledge and best practice constantly evolve. The publisher is not engaged in rendering
medical, legal, accounting, or other professional service. Ifmedical or legal advice or other expert assistance is required,
the services of a competent professional should be sought. This publication is not intended for use in clinical practice or
the delivery of medical care. To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the Editors assume any liability for any
injury and/or damage to persons or property arising out of or related to any use of the material contained in this book.
© 2023 by Kaplan North America, LLC
Published by Kaplan Medical, a division of Kaplan North America, LLC.
1515 West Cypress Creek Road
Fort Lauderdale, Florida 33309
All rights reserved. The text of this publication, or any part thereof, may not be reproduced in any manner whatsoever without
written permission from the publisher.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Course ISBN: 978 1 5062 8449 1
Course Kit ISBN: 978 1 5062 8465 1
Retail ISBN: 978 1 5062 8447 7
Retail Kit ISBN: 978 1 5062 8463 7
Kit items come as a set and should not be broken out and sold separately.
Kaplan Publishing print books are available at special quantity discounts to use for sales promotions, employee premiums,
or educational purposes. For more information or to purchase books, please call the Simon &Schuster special sales
department at 866 506 1949
Editors
Immunology
Tiffany L. Alley, DO, PhD
Chief Resident, Department of Pathology
University of Tennessee Graduate School of Medicine
Knoxville, TN
Microbiology
Christopher C. Keller, PhD
Professor and Director of Microbiology and Immunology
Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine
Erie, P
We want to hear what you think. What do you like or not like about the Notes?
Please email us at medfeedback@kaplan.com
Table of Contents
PART I: IMMUNOLOGY
CHAPTER 1: The Immune System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
CHAPTER 2: Ontogeny of the Immune Cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
CHAPTER 3: Lymphocyte Development and Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
CHAPTER 4: Periphery: Innate Immune Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
CHAPTER 5: Secondary Lymphoid Tissue:
Innate Immune Response Meets Adaptive . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
CHAPTER 6: Secondary Lymphoid Tissue:
B and T Lymphocyte Activation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
CHAPTER 7: Humoral Immunity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
CHAPTER 8: Cell Mediated Immunity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
CHAPTER 9: Immunodiagnostics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
CHAPTER 10: Immunizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
CHAPTER 11: Primary Immunodeficiencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
CHAPTER 12: Hypersensitivity and Autoimmune Disease . . . . . . . . . . . 113
CHAPTER 13: Transplantation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
APPENDIX I: CD Markers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
APPENDIX II: Cytokines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
IMMUNOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
ANSWERS AND EXPLANATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
PART II: MICROBIOLOGY
CHAPTER 1: General Microbiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167
CHAPTER 2: Medically Relevant Bacteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
CHAPTER 3: Bacterial Genetics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 247
CHAPTER 4: Medically Relevant Viruses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 269
CHAPTER 5: Medically Relevant Fungi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 325
CHAPTER 6: Medical Parasitology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 341
CHAPTER 7: Clinical Infectious Disease . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 357
CHAPTER 8: Comparative Microbiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 381
APPENDIX I: Reference Charts and Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 393
MICROBIOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .411
ANSWERS AND EXPLANATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .443
INDEX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .455
v
PART
IMMUNOLOGY

1
The Immune System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Define and describe the components of the immune system
❏ Discriminate between innate and acquired immunity
THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
The immune system is designed to recognize and respond to non self antigen in a
coordinated manner. Additionally, it recognizes and eliminates cells that are
diseased, damaged, distressed, or dying.
The immune system is divided into 2 complementary arms: the innate and the
adaptive immune systems.
Innate Immunity
Innate immunity provides the body’s first line of defense against infectious agents.
It involves several defensive barriers:
• Anatomic and physical (skin, mucous membranes and normal flora)
• Physiologic (temperature, pH, anti microbials and cytokines)
• Complement
• Cellular: phagocytes and granulocytes
• Inflammation
Innate immune defenses have the following characteristics in common:
• Are present intrinsically with or without previous stimulation
• Have limited specificity for shared microbe and cellular structures
(pathogen associated molecular patterns [PAMPs] and damage associated
molecular patterns [DAMPs])
• Have limited diversity as reflected by a limited number of pattern
recognition receptors
• Are not enhanced in activity upon subsequent exposure—no memory
Adaptive Immunity
The components of the adaptive immune response are B and T lymphocytes and
their effector cells.
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Adaptive immune defenses have the following characteristics in common:
• Each B and T lymphocyte is specific for a particular antigen
• As a population, lymphocytes have extensive diversity
• Are enhanced with each repeat exposure —immunologic memory
• Are capable of distinguishing self from non self
• Are self limiting
The features of adaptive immunity are designed to give the individual the best
possible defense against disease.
• Specificity is required, along with immunologic memory, to protect
against persistent or recurrent challenge.
• Diversity is required to protect against the maximum number of potential
pathogens.
• Specialization of effector function is necessary so that the most effective
defense can be mounted against diverse challenges.
• The ability to distinguish between self (host cells) and non self (pathogens)
is vital in inhibiting an autoimmune response.
• Self limitation allows the system to return to a basal resting state after a
challenge to conserve energy and resources and to avoid uncontrolled cell
proliferation resulting in leukemia or lymphoma.
Table I 1 1. Innate versus Adaptive Immunity
Characteristics Innate Adaptive
Specificity For pathogen associated For specific antigens of
molecular patterns microbial and
(PAMPs) nonmicrobial agents
Diversity Limited High
Memory No Yes
Self reactivity No No
Components
Anatomic and Skin, mucosa, normal Lymph nodes, spleen,
physiologic barriers flora, temperature, pH, mucosal associated
antimicrobials, and lymphoid tissues
cytokines
Blood proteins Complement Antibodies
Cells Phagocytes, granulocytes B lymphocytes and
and natural killer (NK) T lymphocytes
cells
Function
The innate and adaptive arms of the immune response work in collaboration to
stop an infection. Once a pathogen has broken through the anatomic and physi
ologic barriers, the innate immune response is immediately activated, oftentimes
able to contain and eliminate the infection.
CHAPTER 1 | THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
When the innate immune response is unable to control the replication of a
pathogen, the adaptive immune response is engaged and activated by the innate
immune response in an antigen specific manner. Typically, it takes 1–2 weeks after
the primary infection for the adaptive immune response to begin clearance of the
infection through the action of effector cells and antibodies.
Once an infection has been cleared, both the innate and adaptive immune responses
cease. Antibodies and residual effector cells continue to provide protective immunity,
while memory cells provide long term immunologic protection from subsequent
infection.
2
1 4
Induction
3
Innate immune of adaptive Immunological
response response Adaptive immune response memory
Level of
microorganism
Antigen’s threshold
level to activate
adaptive immune
response
Duration of infection
Entry of Pathogen cleared
microorganism
FFiigguurree I 1I11. Ti1m.elinTeimelineof the oIfmmtuhnee ImRmeuspnoense Rteospoannse Acute tIonfectiaonn Acute Infection
The innate and adaptive immune responses do not act independently of one
another; rather, they work by a positive feedback mechanism.
• Phagocytic cells recognize pathogens by binding PAMPs through various
pattern recognition receptors leading to phagocytosis.
• Phagocytic cells process and present antigen to facilitate stimulation of
specific T lymphocytes with subsequent release of cytokines that trigger
initiation of specific immune responses.
• T lymphocytes produce cytokines that enhance microbicidal activities of
phagocytes.
• Cytokines released by phagocytes and T lymphocytes will drive differen
tiation of B lymphocytes into plasma cells and isotype switching.
• Antibodies will aid in the destruction of pathogen through opsonization,
complement activation and antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity.
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Anatomic and Physiologic Barriers
Immune
Respons
Phagocytes and
Complement
Innate Granulocytes
Cytokines
Immune
Antibodies
Response
T Lymphocytes
Adaptive
B Lymphocytes
Cytokines
Figure I 1 2. Interaction between Innate and Adaptive Immune Responses
Figure I 1 2. Interaction between Innate and Adaptive Immune Responses
Recall Question
Which of the following is most likely to cause a faster and stronger
immunologic response against the same infectious agent after
re exposure?
A. Innate immunity, as adaptive immunity takes 1–2 weeks
B. Natural killer cells
C. Innate immunity because macrophages recognize PAMPs and
DAMPs
D. Adaptive immunity and immunological memory
E. Complement activation
Answer: D
6
2
Ontogeny of the Immune Cells
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Explain information related to origin and function of cells of the
immune system
❏ Explain information related to antigen recognition molecules of
lymphocytes
❏ Answer questions about the generation of receptor diversity
ORIGIN
Hematopoiesis involves the production, development, differentiation, and matura
tion of the blood cells (erythrocytes, megakaryocytes and leukocytes) from
multipotent stem cells. The site of hematopoiesis changes during development.
During embryogenesis and early fetal development, the yolk sac is the site of
hematopoiesis. Once organogenesis begins, hematopoiesis shifts to the liver and
spleen, and finally, to the bone marrow where it will remain throughout adulthood.
Figure I 2 1. Sites of Hematopoiesis
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
These multipotent stem cells found in the bone marrow have the ability to
undergo asymmetric division. One of the 2 daughter cells will serve to renew the
population of stem cells (self renewal), while the other can give rise to either a
common lymphoid progenitor cell or a common myeloid progenitor cell
(potency). The multipotent stem cells will differentiate into the various lymphoid
and myeloid cells in response to various cytokines and growth factors.
• The common lymphoid progenitor cell gives rise to B lymphocytes, T
lymphocytes and natural killer (NK) cells.
• The common myeloid progenitor cell gives rise to erythrocytes, mega
karyocytes/thrombocytes, mast cells, eosinophils, basophils, neutrophils,
monocytes/macrophages and dendritic cells.
FUNCTION
The white blood cells of both the myeloid and lymphoid stem cells have specialized
functions in the body once their differentiation in the bone marrow is complete.
Cells of the myeloid lineage, except erythrocytes and megakaryocytes, perform
non specific, stereotypic responses and are members of the innate branch of the
immune response. B lymphocytes and T lymphocytes of the lymphoid lineage
perform focused, antigen specific roles in immunity. Natural killer cells are also
from the lymphoid lineage but participate in innate immunity.
Although B lymphocytes and T lymphocytes in the bloodstream are almost
morphologically indistinguishable at the light microscopic level, they represent
2 interdependent cell lineages.
• B lymphocytes remain within the bone marrow to complete their
development.
• T lymphocytes leave the bone marrow and undergo development within
the thymus.
Both B and T lymphocytes have surface membrane receptors designed to bind to
specific antigens; the generation of these receptors will be discussed in chapter 4.
• The natural killer (NK) cell (the third type of lymphocyte) is a large
granular lymphocyte that recognizes tumor and virally infected cells
through non specific binding.
CHAPTER 2 | ONTOGENY OF THE IMMUNE CELLS
In Thymus
Helper T lymphocyte
NK cell T progenitor Thymocyte
Cytotoxic T lymphocyte
Lymphoid B progenitor B Lymphocyte Plasma cell
stem cell
IL 7
Multipotent stem cell Dendritic cell
Monocyte
Granulocyte/
Monocyte
Macrophage
GM CSF, IL 3 progenitor Neutrophil
IL 5
IL 5 Eosinophil Eosinophil
progenitor
Myeloid
Mast cell
stem cell
Thrombopoietin Basophil
Basophil
progenitor
Erythropoieti
IL 11
Megakaryocyte Platelets
Erythroid progenitor Erythrocytes
Figure FigurIe 2 I2.2 2O.ntoOgnetnoygeny ooffImmImumneune CellsCells
9
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Table I 2 1. White Blood Cells
Myeloid Cell Tissue Location Physical Description Function
Neutrophil or Most abundant Granulocyte with a Phagocytic activity aimed at killing
polymorpho circulating blood cell segmented, lobular nuclei extracellular pathogens
nuclear (PMN) (3–5 lobes) and small pink
cell cytoplasmic granules
Lymphoid Cell Tissue Location Physical Description Function
Lymphocyte Bloodstream, secondary Large, dark staining nucleus No function until activated in the
lymphoid tissues with a thin rim of cytoplasm secondary lymphoid tissues
Surface markers:
B lymphocytes
- CD19, 20, 21
T lymphocytes
- CD3
Helper T cells
- CD4
CTLs
- CD8
Plasma cell Bloodstream, secondary Small eccentric nucleus, Terminally differentiated B
lymphoid tissue and intensely staining Golgi lymphocyte that secretes antibodies
bone marrow apparatus
Natural killer Bloodstream Lymphocyte with large Kills virally infected cells and tumor
cell cytoplasmic granules cells
Surface markers:
CD16, 56
(Continued )
1
CHAPTER 2 | ONTOGENY OF THE IMMUNE CELLS
Table I 2 1. White Blood Cells
Myeloid Cell Tissue Location Physical Description Function
Monocyte Circulating blood cell Agranulocyte with a bean or Precursor of tissue macrophage
kidney shaped nucleus
Macrophage Reside in all tissues Agranulocyte with a ruffled • Phagocyte
cytoplasmic membrane and
• Professional antigen presenting
cytoplasmic vacuoles and
cell
vesicles
• T cell activator
Dendritic cell Reside in epithelial Agranulocyte with thin, • Phagocyte
and lymphoid tissue stellate cytoplasmic
• Professional antigen presenting
projections
cell
• T cell activator
Eosinophil Circulating blood cell Granulocyte with bilobed • Elimination of large extracellular
recruited into loose nucleus and large pink parasites
connective tissue of the cytoplasmic granules
• Type I hypersensitivity
respiratory and GI tracts
Mast cell Reside in most tissues Granulocyte with small • Elimination of large extracellular
adjacent to blood nucleus and large blue parasites
vessels cytoplasmic granule
• Type I hypersensitivity
Basophil Low frequency Granulocyte with bilobed • Elimination of large extracellular
circulating blood cell nucleus and large blue parasites
cytoplasmic granules
• Type I hypersensitivity
1
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Laboratory evaluation of patients commonly involves assessment of white blood
cell morphology and relative counts by examination of a blood sample. Changes in
the morphology and proportions of white blood cells indicate the presence of
some pathologic state. A standard white blood cell differential includes neutrophils,
band cells, lymphocytes (B lymphocytes, T lymphocytes, and NK cells), monocytes,
eosinophils and basophils.
Table I 2 2. Leukocytes Evaluated in a WBC Differential
Cell Type Adult Reference Range (%)
Neutrophils (PMNs) 50–70
Band cells 0–5
Lymphocytes 20–40
Monocytes 5–10
Eosinophils 0–5
Basophils <1
Recall Question
Which cytokine differentiates the myeloid stem cell into a
granulocyte that contains a bilobed nucleus and pink cytoplasmic
granules?
A. IL 11
B. IL 5
C. Thrombopoietin
D. GM CSF and IL 3
E. IL 7
Answer: B
1
3
Lymphocyte Development and Selection
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Answer questions about selection of T and B lymphocytes
❏ Solve problems concerning innate immunity and components/barriers
ANTIGEN RECOGNITION MOLECULES OF LYMPHOCYTES
Each cell of the lymphoid lineage is clinically identified by the characteristic
surface molecules that it possesses.
• The mature, naïve B lymphocyte, in its mature ready to respond form,
expresses 2 isotypes of antibody or immunoglobulin called IgM and IgD
within its surface membrane.
• The mature, naive T cell expresses a single genetically related molecule,
called the T cell receptor (TCR), on its surface.
Both of these types of antigen receptors are encoded within the immunoglobulin
superfamily of genes, and are expressed in literally millions of variations in
different lymphocytes as a result of complex and random rearrangements of the
cells’ DNA.
Alpha Beta
Chain Chain
IgD
IgM
Mature B Lymphocyte Mature T Lymphocyte
Figure I 3 1. Antigen Receptors of Mature Lymphocytes
Figure I 3 1. Antigen Receptors of Mature Lymphocytes
1
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
The antigen receptor of the B lymphocyte, or membrane bound immunoglobu
lin, is a 4 chain glycoprotein molecule that serves as the basic monomeric unit for
each of the distinct antibody molecules destined to circulate freely in the serum.
This monomer has 2 identical halves, each composed of a heavy chain and a light
chain. A cytoplasmic tail on the carboxy terminus of each heavy chain extends
through the plasma membrane and anchors the molecule to the cell surface. The
2 halves are held together by disulfide bonds into a shape resembling a “Y.” Some
flexibility of movement is permitted between the halves by disulfide bonds
forming a hinge region.
On the N terminal end of the molecule where the heavy and light chains lie
side by side, an antigen binding site is formed whose 3 dimensional shape will
accommodate the noncovalent binding of one, or a very small number, of related
antigens. The unique structure of the antigen binding site is called the idiotype
of the molecule. Although 2 classes (isotypes) of membrane immunoglobulin
(IgM and IgD) are coexpressed on the surface of a mature, naïve B lymphocyte,
only one idiotype or antigenic specificity is expressed per cell (although in
multiple copies). Each individual is capable of producing hundreds of millions
of unique idiotypes.
Antigen binding site
Antigen binding site
N N
N VL Light chain N
S
S
S
S S
S
S
S
VH
CL
S
S S
S S Determines
Heavy chain C 1H SS S S S idiotype
C C S
Hinge
S S
S S
S S
C 2H
S S
Determines
isotype
S S
C 3H
S S
C C
Figure I 3 2. B Lymphocyte Antigen Recognition Molecule
Figure (MeImb3ran2e. B LymphocByotuend AntIimgemnunogloRbeucloing)nition Molecule
(Membrane Bound Immunoglobulin)
14
CHAPTER 3 | LYMPHOCYTE DEVELOPMENT AND SELECTION
The antigen receptor of the T lymphocyte is composed of 2 glycoprotein chains, a
beta and alpha chain that are similar in length. On the carboxy terminus of the
chains, a cytoplasmic tail extends through the membrane for anchorage. On the
N terminal end of the molecule, an antigen binding site is formed between
the 2 chains, whose 3 dimensional shape will accommodate the binding of a small
antigenic peptide complexed to an MHC molecule presented on the surface of an
antigen presenting cell. This groove forms the idiotype of the TCR. There is no
hinge region present in this molecule, and thus its conformation is quite rigid.
The membrane receptors of B lymphocytes are designed to bind unprocessed
antigens of almost any chemical composition, i.e., polysaccharides, proteins,
lipids, whereas the TCR is designed to bind only peptides complexed to MHC.
Also, although the B cell receptor is ultimately modified to be a circulating,
secreted antibody, the TCR is always membrane bound and never circulating.
In association with these unique antigen recognition molecules on the surface of B
and T cells, accessory molecules are intimately associated with the receptors that
function in signal transduction. Thus, when a lymphocyte binds to an antigen
complementary to its idiotype, a cascade of messages transferred through its
signal transduction complex will culminate in intracytoplasmic phosphorylation
events leading to activation of the cell.
• In the B cell, this signal transduction complex is composed of 2 invariant
chains, Ig alpha and Ig beta, and a B cell co receptor consisting of CD19,
CD21 and CD81.
• The B cell co receptor is implicated in the attachment of several infectious
agents. CD21 is the receptor for EBV and CD81 is the receptor for hepatitis C
and Plasmodium vivax.
• In the T cell, the signal transduction complex is a multichain structure
called CD3.
α β
V V
CD3 CD3
C C
CD21 CD81
Ig β Ig α Ig α Ig β
CD19
B Cell Signal Transduction Complex T Cell Signal Transduction Complex
Figure I 3 3. Lymphocyte Signal Transduction
Figure I 3 3. Lymphocyte Signal Transduction
1
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Table I 3 1. B versus T Lymphocyte Antigen Receptors
Property B Cell Antigen Receptor T Cell Antigen Receptor
Molecules/Lymphocyte 100,000 100,000
Idiotypes/Lymphocyte 1 1
Isotypes/Lymphocyte 2 (IgM and IgD) 1 (α/β)
Is secretion possible? Yes No
Number of combining 2 1
sites/molecule
Mobility Flexible (hinge region) Rigid
Signal transduction Ig α, Ig β, CD19, CD21 CD3
molecules
THE GENERATION OF RECEPTOR DIVERSITY
Because the body requires the ability to respond specifically to millions of
potentially harmful agents it may encounter in a lifetime, a mechanism must exist
to generate as many idiotypes of antigen receptors as necessary to meet this
challenge. If each of these idiotypes was encoded separately in the germline DNA
of lymphoid cells, it would require more DNA than is present in the entire cell. The
generation of this necessary diversity is accomplished by a complex and unique set
of rearrangements of DNA segments that takes place during the maturation of
lymphoid cells.
It has been discovered that individuals inherit a large number of different
segments of DNA which may be recombined and alternatively spliced to create
unique amino acid sequences in the N terminal ends (variable domains) of the
chains that compose their antigen recognition sites. For example, to produce the
heavy chain variable domains of their antigen receptor, B lymphocyte progenitors
select randomly and in the absence of stimulating antigen to recombine 3 gene
segments designated variable (V), diversity (D), and joining (J) out of hundreds of
germline encoded possibilities to produce unique sequences of amino acids in the
variable domains (VDJ recombination).
1
CHAPTER 3 | LYMPHOCYTE DEVELOPMENT AND SELECTION
An analogous random selection is made during the formation of the beta chain of
the TCR.
Germ line
DNA VH1 VH2 VHn DH1 DH2 DH3DH4 D JH1HJnH2JH3JH4 Cμ Cδ Cγ3 Cα2
(D–J joining) Gene rearrangement
Immature
B cell
DNA VH1 VH2 VHn D JH1HJ3H2JH3 JH4 Cμ Cδ Cγ3 Cα2
Gene rearrangement (V–D/J joining)
Immature
B Cell DNA
JH1JH2JH3 JH4
VH2 Cμ Cδ Cγ3 Cα2
DH3 Transcription
Immature
B Cell RNA
VH2 JH1JH2JH3 JH4 Cμ Cδ Cγ3 Cα2
DH3 RNA splicing NOTE
(V/D/J–C joining)
Nucleoplasm
VDJ rearrangements in DNA produce the
Cytoplasm Messenger Nuclear membrane diversity of heavy chain variable domains.
RNA
VH2 DH3 JH1 Cμ
Translation
Specific IgM
Heavy chain
VH2 D JH1H3Cμ
Figure I 3 4. Production of Heavy (B Cell) or Beta (T Cell) Chains of
Figure I 3 4. Production of Heavy (B Cell) or Beta (T Cell) Chains of Lymphocyte Antigen Receptors
Lymphocyte Antigen Receptors
Next, the B lymphocyte progenitor performs random rearrangements of 2 types of
gene segments (V and J) to encode the variable domain amino acids of the light
chain. An analogous random selection is made during the formation of the NOTE
alpha chain of the TCR. The enzymes responsible for these gene rearrangements
mRNA molecules are created which join this
are encoded by the genes RAG1 and RAG2. The RAG1 and RAG2 gene products
are 2 proteins found within the recombinase, a protein complex that includes a variable domain sequence to μ or δ
repair mechanism as well as DNA modifying enzymes. constant domains.
1
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Germ line
DNA
J1 J2 J3 J4
Vκ1 Vκ2 Vκn Cκ
(V–J joining)
Gene rearrangement
Immature
B cell DNA
J1 J2 J3 J4
Vκ1 Cκ
Immature
NOTE
B cell RNA
VJ rearrangements in DNA produce the J1 J2 J3 J4
Vκ1 Cκ
diversity of light chain variable domains.
RNA splicing
(V/J–C joining)
Nucleoplasm
Cytoplasm
Nuclear membrane
Messenger RNA
J1
Vκ1 Cκ
Translation
Specific κ
chain protein
NOTE
J1
Vκ1 Cκ
K or λ constant domains are added to
complete the light chain.
Figure IFi3gur5e. ProduIctio3n 5. oPfrodLucigtihotn (B Cell)oforLAiglhptha ((TBCeCll)ell)Chaionr Aolfphaa Lymp(hTocyteCell) ACnthigaienn Roecfeptoar
Lymphocyte Antigen Receptor
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY While heavy chain gene segments are undergoing recombination, the enzyme
terminal deoxyribonucleotidyl transferase (Tdt) randomly inserts bases (without
Tdt is used as a marker for early stage
a template on the complementary strand) at the junctions of V, D, and Jsegments
T and B cell development in acute
(N nucleotide addition). The random addition of the nucleotide generates
lymphoblastic leukemia. junctional diversity.
When the light chains are rearranged later, Tdt is not active, though it is active
during the rearrangement of all gene segments in the formation of the TCR. This
generates even more diversity than the random combination of V, D, and J
segments alone.
1
CHAPTER 3 | LYMPHOCYTE DEVELOPMENT AND SELECTION
AGGA TAAGCGTAAC
D J
TCCT ATTCGC ATTG
1 2
Tdt adds N nucleotides
Repair enzymes add
complementary nucleotides
Figure I 3 6. Function of Tdt
Figure I 3 6. Function of Tdt
Needless to say, many of these gene segment rearrangements result in the produc
tion of truncated or nonfunctional proteins. When this occurs, the cell has a
second chance to produce a functional strand by rearranging the gene segments of
the homologous chromosome. If it fails to make a functional protein from
rearrangement of segments on either chromosome, the cell is induced to undergo
apoptosis or programmed cell death.
In this way, the cell has 2 chances to produce a functional heavy (or β) chain. A
similar process occurs with the light (or α) chain. Once a functional product has
been achieved by one of these rearrangements, the cell shuts off the rearrangement
and expression of the other allele on the homologous chromosome—a process
known as allelic exclusion. This process ensures that B and T lymphocytes
synthesize only one specific antigen receptor per cell.
Because any heavy (or β) chain can associate with any randomly generated light
(or α) chain, one can multiply the number of different possible heavy chains by the
number of different possible light chains to yield the total number of possible
idiotypes that can be formed. This generates yet another level of diversity.
Table I 3 2. Mechanisms for Generating Receptor Diversity
Mechanism Cell in Which It Is Expressed
Existence in genome of multiple B and T cells
V, D, J segments
VDJ recombination B and T cells
N nucleotide addition B cells (only heavy chain)
T cells (all chains)
Combinatorial association of B and T cells
heavy and light chains
Somatic hypermutation B cells only, after antigen stimulation
(see Chapter 7)
1
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Downstream on the germline DNA from the rearranged segments, are encoded
the amino acid sequences of all the constant domains of the chain. These domains
tend to be similar within the classes or isotypes of immunoglobulin or TCR chains
and are thus called constant domains.
5' V -D -J μ δ γ3 γ1 α1 γ2 γ4 ε α2 3'
Figure I 3 7. Immunoglobulin Heavy Chain DNA
Figure I 3 7. Immunoglobulin Heavy Chain DNA
The first set of constant domains for the heavy chain of immunoglobulin that is
transcribed is that of IgM and next, IgD. These 2 sets of domains are alternatively
spliced to the variable domain product at the RNA level. There are only 2 isotypes
of light chain constant domains, named κ and λ, and one will be combined with
the product of light chain variable domain rearrangement to produce the other
half of the final molecule. Thus, the B lymphocyte produces IgM and IgD mol
ecules with identical idiotypes and inserts these into the membrane for antigen
recognition.
Table I 3 3. Clinical Outcomes of Failed Gene Rearrangement
Clinical Syndrome Genetics Molecular Defect Symptoms
Omenn syndrome Autosomal recessive Missense mutation in RAG Lack of B cells (below limits of detection)
genes
Marked decrease in predominantly Th2
The RAG enzymes have
Characterized by early onset, failure to
only partial activity
thrive, red rash (generalized), diarrhea,
and severe immune deficiency
Severe combined Autosomal recessive Null mutations in RAG1 or Total lack of B and T cells
immunodeficiency RAG2 genes
Total defects in humoral and cell
(SCID)
No RAG enzyme activity mediated immunity
Recall Question
Which of the following mechanisms is involved in generation of the
receptor diversity in B and T cells?
A. Rearrangement of V(D)J segments
B. N nucleotide addition at junctions of V, D, and J segments
C. Combinatorial association of heavy and light chains
D. A recombinase enzyme
E. All mechanisms are involved
Answer: E
2
CHAPTER 3 | LYMPHOCYTE DEVELOPMENT AND SELECTION
DEVELOPMENT OF B AND T LYMPHOCYTES
As lymphoid progenitors develop in the bone marrow, they make random rear
rangements of their germline DNA to produce the unique idiotypes of antigen
recognition molecules that they will use throughout their lives. The bone marrow,
therefore, is considered a primary lymphoid organ in humans because it supports
and encourages these early developmental changes. B lymphocytes complete their
entire formative period in the bone marrow and can be identified in their progress
by the immunoglobulin chains they produce.
Recall Question
What is the cause of Omenn syndrome?
A. Null mutations in RAG1 and RAG2 genes
B. Missense mutation in Tdt enzyme
C. Missense mutation in RAG genes
D. Heterozygous deletion of 22q11
E. Somatic hypermutation
Answer: C
B Lymphocyte Development and Selection
In essence, the rearrangement of the gene segments and the subsequent produc
tion of immunoglobulin chains drive B cell development.
Because these gene segment rearrangements occur randomly and in the absence of
stimulation with foreign antigen, it stands to reason that many of the idiotypes of
receptors produced could have a binding attraction or affinity for normal body
constituents. These cells, if allowed to develop further, could develop into self
reactive lymphocytes that could cause harm to the host. Therefore, one of the key
roles of the bone marrow stroma and interdigitating cells is to remove such
potentially harmful products. Cells whose idiotype has too great an affinity for
normal cellular molecules are either deleted in the bone marrow (clonal deletion)
or inactivated in the periphery (clonal anergy). Anergic B cells express high levels
of IgD on their surface rendering them inactive. The elimination of self reactive
cells in the bone marrow is intended to minimize the number of self reactive
B lymphocytes released to the periphery, only those cells that are selectively
unresponsive (tolerant) to self antigens are allowed to leave the bone marrow.
2
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Plasma
cell
Bone Marrow Periphery
Lymphoid Pro B cell Pre B Immature Mature Activated/
stem cell (progenitor) cell B cell B cell blast B cell
Cytoplasmic
Ig+
Ig heavy Light chain
chain gene gene Antigen
rearrangement rearrangement
Memory
B cell
Marker
Cytoplasmic Surface Surface
μ+ IgM+ IgM+, IgD+
Surface
rag expression
IgG+, IgA+
Tdt or IgE+
MHC II
CD19, CD20, CD21, CD40
Figure I 3 8. B Cell Differentiation
Figure I 3 8. B Cell Differentiation
T Lymphocyte Development and Selection
Immature lymphocytes destined to the T cell lineage leave the bone marrow and
proceed to the thymus, the second primary lymphoid organ dedicated to the
maturation of T cells. These pre thymic cells are referred to as double negative
T lymphocytes since they do not express CD4 or CD8 on their surface. The
thymus is a bilobed structure located above the heart; it consists of an outer cortex
packed with immature T cells and an inner medulla into which cells pass as they
mature. Both the cortex and medulla are laced with a network of epithelial cells,
dendritic cells, and macrophages, which interact physically with the developing
thymocytes.
22
CHAPTER 3 | LYMPHOCYTE DEVELOPMENT AND SELECTION
Cortical
Thymocyte
epithelial cell
Trabecula Dendritic cell
Dividing Dead cell
thymocyte Macrophage
Capsule
Cortex
Blood
vessel
Medulla Medullary
epithelial
cell
Figure I 3 9. Structure of the Thymus
Figure I 3 9. Structure of the Thymus
Within the cortex, the thymocytes will begin to rearrange the beta and alpha
chains of the T cell receptor (TCR) while coexpressing the CD3 complex as well as
the CD4 and CD8 co receptors; these thymocytes are collectively referred to as
being double positive. As the developing thymocytes begin to express their TCRs,
they are subjected to a rigorous 2 step selection process. Because the TCR is
designed to bind antigenic peptides presented on the surface of antigen
presenting cells (APCs) in the body, a selection process is necessary to remove
those cells that would bind to normal self antigens and cause autoimmunity, as
well as those that have no attraction whatsoever for the surfaces of APCs. This is
accomplished by exposure of developing thymocytes to high levels of a unique
group of membrane bound molecules known as major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) antigens.
The MHC is a collection of highly polymorphic genes on the short arm of chromo
some 6 in humans. There are 2 major classes of cell bound MHC gene products: I
and II. Both class I and class II molecules are expressed at high density on the
surface of cells of the thymic stroma. MHC gene products are also called human
leukocyte antigens (HLA).
• Class I MHC gene products: HLA A, HLA B, HLA C
• Class II MHC gene products: HLA DM, HLA DP, HLA DQ, HLA DR
Table I 3 4. Class I and II Gene Products
Class I Gene Products Class II Gene Products
HLA A HLA B HLA C HLA DM* HLA DP HLA DQ HLA DR
*HLA DM is not a cell surface molecule but functions as a molecular chaperone to promote
proper peptide loading.
2
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Class I molecules are expressed on all nucleated cells in the body, as well as
platelets. They are expressed in codominant fashion, meaning that each cell
expresses 2 A, 2 B, and 2 C products (one from each parent).
• The molecules (A, B, and C) consist of a heavy chain with 3 extracellular
domains and an intracytoplasmic carboxy terminus.
• A second light chain, β2 microglobulin, is not encoded within the MHC
and functions in peptide loading and transport of the class I antigen to
the cell surface.
• A groove between the first 2 extracellular domains of the α chain is
designed to accommodate small peptides to be presented to the TCR.
Peptide binding
Peptide binding
α2
groove
groove
α2
s
s
α3 α1 α1
s
s
β Microglobulin2
s
s
Cell
membrane
α3
β Microglobulin2
Figure I 3 10. Class I MHC Molecule (left ) and X Ray Crystallographic Image (right )
Figure I 3 10. Class I MHC Molecule (left) and X Ray Crystallographic Image (right)
of Class I MHC Peptide Binding Groove
of Class I MHC Peptide Binding Groove
Class II MHC molecules are expressed (also codominantly) on the professional
antigen presenting cells of the body (primarily the macrophages, B lymphocytes,
and dendritic cells).
• The molecules are 2 chain structures of similar length, called α and β,
each possessing 2 extracellular domains and 1 intracytoplasmic domain.
• A groove that will accommodate peptides to be presented to the TCR is
formed at the N terminal end of both chains.
2
CHAPTER 3 | LYMPHOCYTE DEVELOPMENT AND SELECTION
Peptide binding
groove
α1 domain
α β
Cell
membrane
β1 domain
Figure I 3 11. Class II MHC Molecule (left ), and X ray Crystallographic
Figure I 3 11. Class IIMHC Molecule (left), and X ray Crystallographic
Image (right ) of Class II MHC Peptide Binding Groove
Image (right) of Class IIMHC Peptide Binding Groove
Within the thymus, each of these MHC products, loaded with normal self
peptides, is presented to the developing double positive thymocytes.
• Those that have TCRs capable of binding with low affinity will receive a
positive selection signal to divide and establish clones that will eventually
mature in the medulla.
• Those that fail to recognize self MHC at all will not be encouraged to
mature (failure of positive selection).
• Those that bind too strongly to self MHC molecules and self peptide will
be induced to undergo apoptosis (negative selection) because these cells
would have the potential to cause autoimmune disease.
Although double positive thymocytes co express CD4 and CD8, the cells are
directed to express only CD8 if their TCR binds class I molecules, and only CD4 if
their TCR binds class II molecules. At this point in T cell development, the thymo
cytes are referred to as being single positive.
This selection process is an extraordinarily rigorous one. A total of 95–99% of all
T cell precursors entering the thymus are destined to die there. Only those with
TCRs appropriate to protect the host from foreign invaders will be permitted to
exit to the periphery: CD4+ cells that recognize class II MHC are destined to
become “helper” T cells (Th), and CD8+ cells that recognize class I MHC are
destined to become cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs).
While most self reactive T cells will be deleted in the thymus, a small population
of these T cells will instead differentiate into regulatory T cells (Tregs). Tregs
inhibit self reactive Th1 cells in the periphery.
2
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
• Identified by their constitutive expression of CD25 on the surface and by
the expression of the transcription factor FoxP3
• Secrete IL 10 and TGF β which inhibit inflammation
• Shown to be critical in the prevention of autoimmunity
Tregs will leave the thymus and serve in a peripheral tolerance.
Treg (CD4+/CD25+)
FoxP3
Figure FiIgur3e 12.I 3Id1e2n.tificIadteionntification ofofTTreregg CCeellllss
Pre Thymic Circulating
Markers thymic Thymic Cortex Medulla T Cell
Tdt
rag
expression
CD2
CD3
TCR
CD4
+
CD8
Figure I 3 13. Human T Cell Differentiation
Figure I 3 13. Human T Cell DifferentiationCD2
Recall Question
What is the function of MHC class II?
A. Presenting intracellular peptides to Tregs
B. Presenting extracellular peptides to CD8+ cells
C. Presenting intracellular peptides to CD4+ cells
D. Presenting intracellular peptides to CD8+ cells
E. Presenting extracellular peptides to CD4+ cells
Answer: E
26
4
Periphery: Innate Immune Response
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Describe the structure and function of secondary lymphoid organs
❏ Describe the structure of lymph nodes
❏ Answer questions about chemokines and adhesion molecules
INNATE IMMUNITY
The innate immune system is an important part of any immune response. It is
responsible for reacting quickly to invading microbes and for keeping the host
alive while the adaptive immune system is developing a very specific response. The
innate immune defenses are all present at birth; they have a very limited diversity
for antigen, and they attack the microbes with the same basic vigor no matter how
many times they have seen the same pathogen.
The innate immune system handles pathogens in 2 general ways:
Inflammation Interferons, NK cells
Elimination of microbes Elimination of viruses
Figure I 4 Fi1g.urePathoIge4n 1. PathogCenlearanceClearance by btyhethe InInnanteate ImImmmuunnee SystemSystem
Microbes may gain access to the tissues if the physical barriers are breached. In the
tissues, they come in contact with phagocytic cells such as neutrophils, macrophages
and dendritic cells, which will produce chemical messengers called cytokines that
can initiate an inflammatory response.
Many times the innate immune components are enough to eliminate the pathogen,
but not always. The pathogens may gain access to the blood, in which the alternate
pathway for complement activation may provide some additional help. But this is
where the adaptive immune system may have to take over to resolve the infection
and eliminate the pathogen.
2
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Portals of entry for microbes (physical barriers)
Physical barriers are breached
• Cellular attack via cells of innate immunity:
dendritic cells, neutrophils and macrophages
Pathogens may gain access into the tissues
• These cells can interact with acquired
immunity via cytokines, inflammation
Tissues are breached
Pathogens may gain access into the blood Alternate complement pathway activation
Figure I 4 2. Entry Sites for Pathogens
Figure I 4 2. Entry Sites for Pathogens
INNATE IMMUNE COMPONENTS/BARRIERS
There are several components to the innate immune response that are essential for
this early defense against pathogens: anatomic (physical) barriers, physiologic
barriers, innate cellular response, and inflammation.
Anatomic Barriers
The main portals of entry for most pathogens are the skin, the respiratory tract,
and the GI tract. All of these surfaces are lined with epithelial cells that can
produce a few antimicrobial products such as defensins and interferons. They may
also contain a number of specialized intra epithelial lymphocytes (IEL) called γδ T
cells. These specialized T cells are considered part of innate immunity as they can
only recognize shared microbial structures.
• The skin is a great physical barrier as most pathogens can’t invade intact
skin. The pH of the skin is also slightly acidic and can retard the growth
of pathogenic organisms.
• The respiratory tract is lined with cilia that physically attempt to remove
microbes as they enter. Saliva and mucous are also difficult environments
for microbes to live in, as there are many antimicrobial enzymes and
chemicals within those entities.
• The GI tract is also a mucous membrane with similar properties to the
respiratory tract; however, pathogens that enter here must first survive
a trip through the stomach with a highly acidic pH that kills many
microorganisms.
2
CHAPTER 4 | PERIPHERY: INNATE IMMUNE RESPONSE
Physiologic Barriers
Physiologic barriers include the following components:
• Temperature
– Many microbial pathogens can’t survive much past human body temper
ature. When the inflammatory response is initiated in the local tissues,
cytokines may act systemically to alter the temperature set point in the
hypothalamus resulting in fever.
• pH
– The acidic pH of the stomach impedes the growth and transmission to
the gut of many pathogens.
– The skin is also acidic and retards the growth of many microorganisms.
• Chemical
– Lysozyme present in secretions such as tears, saliva, breast milk and
mucous can break down the cell wall peptidoglycan of bacteria.
– Defensins found within phagocytes can form pores in bacteria and fungi.
• Interferons
– IFN α and IFN β are anti viral interferons. They have a direct anti viral
effect by transiently inhibiting nascent protein synthesis in cells.
Innate Cellular Response
Phagocytic cells (monocytes/macrophages, neutrophils and dendritic cells)
are part of the first line of defense against invading pathogens. They recognize
pathogens via shared molecules that are not expressed on host cells. They are
responsible for controlling the infections and sometimes are even capable of
eradicating them.
Receptors of the innate immune system are referred to as pattern recognition
receptors (PRRs). PRRs recognize pathogen associated molecular patterns
(PAMPs), molecules that are shared by pathogens of the same type (bacterial LPS,
n formyl peptides etc.) or damage associated molecular patterns (DAMPs)
released from dying or damaged cells. These receptors are present intrinsically,
encoded in the germline genes, and are not generated through somatic recombina
tion as the lymphocyte receptors are generated.
The innate immune system can recognize <1,000 patterns on various pathogens,
compared to the adaptive immune system (B and T cells) which can recognize
over 1 billion specific sequences on pathogens.
Inflammasome
The inflammasome is an important part of the innate immune system. It is
expressed in myeloid cells as a signaling system for detection of pathogens and
stressors. Activation of the inflammasome results in the production of IL 1β and
IL 18, which are potent inflammatory cytokines.
2
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Plasma
membrane
Innate signals (e.g., TLRs)
NLRP 3 (sensor)
Adaptor Nucleus
Caspase 1 (inactive)
Pro–IL1β gene
transcription
NLRP 3
Caspase 1
inflammasome
(active)
IL 1β
Pro–IL1β
Acute
inflammation
Secreted
IL 1β
Figure I 4 3. Inflammasome
Figure I 4 3. Inflammasome
3
CHAPTER 4 | PERIPHERY: INNATE IMMUNE RESPONSE
Table I 4 1. Receptors of the innate immune System
Receptor Type Location in Cell Receptor Name Pathogen Target Downstream Effects
Toll like receptors Extracellular TLR 1, 2, 6 Bacterial lipopeptides Activation of transcription
(TLR) factors (including NF κB)
TLR 2 Bacterial peptidoglycan
which results in the
transcription of
TLR 4 Lipopolysaccharide
cytokines, adhesion
(LPS)
molecules, and enzymes
TLR 5 Flagellin that are antimicrobial
Intracellular TLR 3 DS RNA
(endosomal)
TLR 7,8 SS RNA
TLR 9 Unmethylated CpG
oligonucleotides
NOD like receptors Intracellular NOD1, NOD2 Components of Signals via NF κB result
(NLR) (cytosolic) bacterial PG in macrophage activation
NLRP 3 Microbial products Inflammasome NLRP 3
and molecules from (sensor) + adaptor
damaged or dying cells protein links procaspase
(ATP, uric acid crystals, 1 and activates it to
reactive oxygen caspase 1; it is the
species) caspase that cleaves the
pro IL 1β to generate
IL 1β
RIG like Cytoplasmic RIG 1, MDA 5 Viral RNA Interferon production
receptors (RLR)
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Mutations in Innate Immune Receptors and Correlation with Disease
Mutation Effect
Mutation in signaling molecules Recurrent, severe bacterial
affecting TLRs infections (pneumonia)
Gain of function mutations in Gout
inflammasome
Atherosclerosis
Type II diabetes
NOD 2 mutations IBD
IL 12 receptor deficiency Recurrent infections with
intracellular bacteria
IFN γ receptor deficiency (Mycobacterium)
3
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Table I 4 2. Myeloid Cells
Myeloid Cell Tissue Location Identification Function
Monocyte Bloodstream, 0–900/μL Kidney bean shaped Phagocytic, differentiate
nucleus, CD14 positive into tissue macrophages
Macrophage Tissues Ruffled membrane, Phagocytosis, secretion
cytoplasm with vacuoles of cytokines
and vesicles, CD14
positive
Neutrophil Bloodstream, Multilobed nucleus; small Phagocytosis and
1,800–7,800/μL light pink to purple activation of bactericidal
granules mechanisms
CD14 positive
Cells of Innate Immunity
Neutrophils
• Circulating phagocytes
• Short lived
• Rapid response, not prolonged defense
Monocytes/Macrophages
• Monocytes circulate in the blood, become macrophages in the tissues
• Provide a prolonged defense
• Produce cytokines that initiate and regulate inflammation
• Phagocytose pathogens
• Clear dead tissue and initiate tissue repair
• Macrophages will develop along one of 2 different pathways
Table I 4 3. Pathways for Macrophage Activation
Classical M1 Alternative M2
Induced by innate immunity Induced by IL 4, IL 13
(TLRs, IFN γ)
Phagocytosis, initiate Inflammatory Tissue repair and control of
response inflammation
3
CHAPTER 4 | PERIPHERY: INNATE IMMUNE RESPONSE
Table I 4 4. Additional Myeloid Cells
Myeloid Cell Tissue Location Identification Function
Dendritic Cells Epithelia, tissues Long cytoplasmic arms Antigen capture, transport,
and presentation, initiate
CD14 positive
inflammation
Mast Cells Tissues, mucosa, Small nucleus, Release of granules
epithelia cytoplasm packed with containing histamine, etc.,
large blue granules during allergic responses
Natural Killer Lymphocyte Lymph nodes, spleen, Lymphocytes with large Kill tumor/virus cell targets
mucosal associated cytoplasmic granules or antibody coated target
lymphoid tissues, bone CD16 + CD56 positive cells, secretion of IFN γ
marrow
Dendritic cells (DCs)
• Found in all tissues
• Antigen processing and presentation
• Two major functions: initiate inflammatory response and stimulate
adaptive immune response
Mast cells
• Skin, mucosa
• Two pathways for activation: innate TLRs and antibody dependent (IgE)
Natural killer (NK) cells
• Blood, periphery
• Direct lysis of cells, secretion of IFN γ
Macrophages, DCs IL 12 Activate NK cells IFN γ
ACTIVATE
Figure IF4igur4e. CIoll4abo4ra.tioCnollaboration of oMfacMroapchroapgheasges andandNK NCKells Cells
3
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Recall Question
Bacterial lipopolysaccharides may induce inflammation by binding
to which of the following?
A. TLR 4
B. TLR 1,2,6
C. NLRP 3
D. RIG 1 and MDA 5
E. TLR 9
Answer: A
INFLAMMATORY RESPONSE
Complement
The complement system is a set of interacting proteins released into the blood after
production in the liver. The components act together as zymogens, activating one
another in cascade fashion after initiation from a variety of stimuli. Three path
ways of activation occur in the body and culminate similarly in the production of
important split products that mediate inflammation, enhance phagocytosis by
opsonization, and cause lysis of particles by membrane pore formation.
1 2 3
Recruitment of Opsonization Killing
Inflammatory Cells of Pathogens of Pathogens
and Anaphylatoxins
C3b C5b
C3a 6 7 8 9 9
Bacteria
Membrane attack
complex → puts
C4a Clearance of
holes in membrane
immune complexes
C5a
C3b
Immune complexes
Figure I 4 5. Three Functions of the Complement System
Figure I 4 5. Three Functions of the Complement System
Two of the pathways are considered part of the innate immune system: the
alternate pathway and the lectin binding or mannose binding pathway (MBP).
The alternate pathway for complement activation is shown below; the MBP
activates the classical complement pathway but without the use of antibody, and is
therefore considered part of innate immunity. The MBP is activated when
mannose binding lectin binds to carbohydrates on the pathogen.
34
CHAPTER 4 | PERIPHERY: INNATE IMMUNE RESPONSE
The alternative pathway of complement activation is probably the more primitive
of the pathways because it is initiated by simple attraction of the early factors to
the surfaces of microbes. Bacterial polysaccharides and the lipopolysaccharide of
the cell envelope of gram negative bacteria both serve as potent, initiating stimuli.
Spontaneously
Factor B Ba
generated C3b C3a
C5a
Microbial surface (e.g., endotoxin)
Factor D
protects C3b C5b
C3bBb C3bBb3b 6 7 8 9 9
Cell membrane C3 convertase C5 convertase Membrane
(e.g., of bacterium) attack complex
Amplification loop
C3b deposited on
cell/particle surface
Figure I 4 6. The Alternative Complement Pathway
Figure I 4 6. The Alternative Complement Pathway
Recall Question
Which of the following is true of the complement system?
A. C3a, C4a, and C5a serve as anaphylatoxins
B. C5a is a chemotactic factor
C. C3b opsonizes bacteria and clears immune complexes
D. C5b is part of MAC
E. A, B, C, and D are correct
Answer: E
Acute Inflammatory Response
Antigens are normally introduced into the body across the mucosa or the epithe
lia. The acute inflammatory response is often the first response to this invasion
and represents a response of the innate immune system to block the challenge.
The first step in the acute inflammatory response is activation of the vascular
endothelium in the breached epithelial barrier. Cytokines and other inflammatory
mediators released in the area as a result of tissue damage induce expression of
selectin type adhesion molecules on the endothelial cells. Neutrophils are the first
cells to bind to the inflamed endothelium and extravasate into the tissues, peaking
within 6 hours. Monocytes, macrophages, and even eosinophils may arrive 5–6
hours later in response to neutrophil released mediators.
The extravasation of phagocytes into the area requires 4 sequential, overlapping steps:
Step 1: Rolling
Phagocytes attach loosely to the endothelium by low affinity, selectin carbohydrate
interactions. E selectin molecules on the endothelium bind to mucin like
adhesion molecules on the phagocyte membrane and bind the cell briefly, but the
force of blood flow into the area causes the cell to detach and reattach repeatedly,
rolling along the endothelial surface until stronger binding forces can be elicited.
35
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Step 2: Activation by chemo attractants
Chemokines released in the area during inflammation, such as interleukin 8
(IL 8), complement split product C5a, and N formyl peptides produced by
bacteria bind to receptors on the phagocyte surface and trigger a G
activating signal. This signal induces a conformational changeprotein–minediated
integrin molecules in the phagocyte membrane that increases their affinity for
immunoglobulin superfamily adhesion molecules on the endothelium.
Step 3: Arrest and adhesion
Interaction between integrins and Ig superfamily cellular adhesion molecules
(Ig CAMs) mediates the tight binding of the phagocyte to the endothelial cell.
These integrin IgCAM interactions also mediate the tight binding of phago
cytes and their movement through the extracellular matrix.
Step 4: Transendothelial migration
The phagocyte extends pseudopodia through the vessel wall and extravasates
into the tissues.
CAM: cellular adhesion molecule
Rolling
Activation Transendothelial
Arrest/adhesion migration
Endothelium
Neutrophil
Chemokine or
chemoattractant receptor
Mucin like Integrin
CAM
Chemokine
Ig superfamily
IL 8
E selectin CAM
Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4
Figure I 4 7. Steps of Phagocyte Extravasation
Figure I 4 7. Steps of Phagocyte Extravasation
3
CHAPTER 4 | PERIPHERY: INNATE IMMUNE RESPONSE
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD) is a rare autosomal recessive disease
in which there is an absence of CD18 (the common β2 chain of a number of
integrin molecules). A key element in the migration of leukocytes is integrin
mediated cell adhesion; patients suffer from an inability of their leukocytes to
undergo adhesion dependent migration into sites of inflammation. The first
indication of this defect is often omphalitis, a swelling and reddening around
the stalk of the umbilical cord.
• Patients are no more susceptible to viral infection than are normal
controls, but they suffer recurrent, chronic bacterial infections.
• Patients frequently have abnormally high numbers of granulocytes in their
circulation, but migration into sites of infection is not possible, so abscess
and pus formation do not occur.
• One method for diagnosing LAD involves evaluating expression (or lack)
of the β chain (CD18) of the integrin by flow cytometry.
• Bacterial infections in LAD patients can be treated with antibiotics
but they recur. If a suitable bone marrow donor can be found, the
hematopoietic system of the patient is destroyed with cytotoxic chemicals
and a bone marrow transplant is performed.
Once in the tissues, neutrophils express increased levels of receptors for
chemoattractants and exhibit chemotaxis migrating up a concentration gradient
toward the attractant. Neutrophils release chemoattractive factors that call in other
phagocytes.
Table I 4 5. Chemoattractive Molecules
Chemoattractive
Molecule Origin
Chemokines (IL 8) Tissue mast cells, platelets, neutrophils,
monocytes, macrophages, eosinophils, basophils,
lymphocytes
Complement split Classical or alternative pathways
product C5a
Leukotriene B4 Membrane phospholipids of macrophages,
monocytes, neutrophils, mast cells → arachidonic
acid cascade → lipoxygenase pathway
Formyl methionyl Released from microorganisms
peptides
3
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Blood Tissue
Monocyte
Complement activation
C5a
Histamines
Prostaglandins
Leukotrienes
Mast cell Bacteria Tissue damage
Neutrophil Chemotaxis
C5a
Chemotaxis
Chemokines
IL 8
IL 1, IL 6, TNF α
Prostaglandins
Leukotrienes
Lymphocyte
Activated
macrophage
LFA 1
ICAM 1
Figure I 4 8. Acute Inflammatory Response
Figure I 4 8. Acute Inflammatory Response
Phagocytosis
Once chemotaxis of phagocytic cells into the area of antigen entry is accomplished,
these cells ingest and digest particulate debris, such as microorganisms, host
cellular debris, and activated clotting factors. This process, called phagocytosis,
involves the following:
• Extension of pseudopodia to engulf attached material
• Fusion of the pseudopodia to trap the material in a phagosome
• Fusion of the phagosome with a lysosome to create a phagolysosome
• Digestion
• Exocytosis of digested contents
Neutrophils release granule contents into extracellular milieu during phagocytosis
and inflammation in which the neutrophils die, forming what is known as pus.
They extrude nuclear contents, histones, neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs)
which function to:
• Trap and kill pathogens
• May damage tissues when enzymes, ROS get released into tissues
3
CHAPTER 4 | PERIPHERY: INNATE IMMUNE RESPONSE
Bacteria
Pseudopodia
Phagosome
Lysosome
Phagolysosome
Figure I 4 9. Phagocytosis
Figure I 4 9. Phagocytosis
Opsonization
Both macrophages and neutrophils have membrane receptors for certain types of
antibody (IgG) and certain complement components (C3b). If an antigen is coated
with either of these materials, adherence and phagocytosis may be enhanced by up
to 4,000 fold. Thus, antibody and complement are called opsonins, and the means
by which they enhance phagocytosis is called opsonization.
Fc receptor (CD16)
IgG Immunoglobulin
Macrophage
Bacterial organism
C3b
C3b receptor
Figure I 4 10. Opsonization of Bacteria with Antibody and Complement C3b
Figure I 4 10. Opsonization of Bacteria with Antibody and Complement C3b
3
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Intracellular Killing
During phagocytosis, a metabolic process known as the respiratory burst activates
a membrane bound oxidase that generates oxygen metabolites, which are toxic to
ingested microorganisms. Two oxygen dependent mechanisms of intracellular
digestion are activated as a result of this process.
• NADPH oxidase reduces oxygen to superoxide anion, which generates
hydroxyl radicals and hydrogen peroxide, which are microbicidal.
• Myeloperoxidase in the lysosomes acts on hydrogen peroxide and chloride
ions to produce hypochlorite (the active ingredient in household bleach),
which is microbicidal.
Additionally, reactive nitrogen intermediates play an important role. Inducible
nitric oxide synthase converts arginine to nitric oxide, which has potent antimi
crobial properties.
The lysosomal contents of phagocytes contain oxygen independent degradative
materials:
• Lysozyme digests bacterial cell walls by cleaving peptidoglycan
• Defensins form channels in bacterial cell membranes
• Lactoferrin chelates iron
• Hydrolytic enzymes
Oxygen Independent Oxygen Dependent Killing
Killing
Myelo
contai ns
Lysosome peroxidase
•OH, 1O2 H2O2
Lysozyme
H2O2
Defensins
Lactoferrin O2 •O2 - Cl Toxic
Hydrolytic oxidants
enzymes
NADPH
oxidase
ROS NO iNOS
Arginin
Phagosome membrane
Citrulline
Cell membrane
Figure I 4 11. Metabolic Stimulation and Killing Within the Phagocyte
Figure I 4 11. Metabolic Stimulation and Killing Within the Phagocyte
40
CHAPTER 4 | PERIPHERY: INNATE IMMUNE RESPONSE
Recall Question
Granulocytes and macrophages kill phagocytosed bacteria by
which of the following?
A. Production of cytokines
B. Respiratory burst and lysosomal contents
C. Opsonization and complement activation
D. Affinity maturation
E. Citrulline
Answer: B
Systemic Inflammation
During the acute inflammatory response, pro inflammatory cytokines such as
IL 1, IL 6 and TNF α are produced. These cytokines have systemic effects on the
tissues, including fever, production of acute phase proteins, and leukocytosis.
Local acute inflammatory
response
IL 1, TNF α, IL 6 IL 1, TNF α
Hypothalamus
IL 1, TNF α, IL 6
Bone marrow
Liver
Prostaglandins
Leukocytosis
Acute phase proteins, such as
Fever CRP, mannose binding protein,
and complement components
FigureFigureI 4I 142.12. SySsytsetmemicic InflIanmflmamatmoraytory ResponseResponse
CLINICAL CORRELATE
When defects prevent phagocytes from performing their critical functions as
first responders and intracellular destroyers of invading antigens, clinically
important pathologic processes ensue. Such defects tend to make the patient
susceptible to severe infections with extracellular bacteria and fungi.
4
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is an inherited deficiency in
the production of one of several subunits of NADPH oxidase. This
defect eliminates the phagocyte’s ability to produce many critical oxygen
dependent intracellular metabolites (·O2 -, ·OH, 1O2, and H2O2). The 2 other
intracellular killing mechanisms remain intact (myeloperoxidase + H2O2 →
HOCl and lysosomal contents).
• If the patient is infected with a catalase negative organism, the H2O2
waste product produced by the bacterium can be used as a substrate for
myeloperoxidase, and the bacterium is killed.
• If the patient is infected with a catalase positive organism (e.g.,
Staphylococcus, Klebsiella, Serratia, Aspergillus), the myeloperoxidase
system lacks its substrate (because these organisms destroy H2O2), and the
patient is left with the oxygen independent lysosomal mechanisms that
prove inadequate to control rampant infections. Thus, CGD patients suffer
from chronic, recurrent infections with catalase positive organisms.
Oxygen Independent Killing Oxygen Dependent Killing
Myelo
Lysosome c noatnis peroxidase Intracellular Killing in CGD
H2O2
Lysozyme H2O2
Defensins
O2
Lactoferrin destroys
Hydrolytic NADPH cat (–
enzymes oxidase catalase (+)
missing
Killed
Phagosome Not
membrane killed
Cell membrane
Failures of phagocytic cells to generate oxygen radicals are easily detected by
the nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) reduction test or neutrophil oxidative index
(NOI; a flow cytometric assay). The dihydrorhodamine test—a similar test
using flow cytometry—may also be used.
Incubate in the presence
of nitroblue tetrazolium
Nitroblue Tetrazolium Reduction
Normal Abnormal
Formazan positive Formazan negative
(purple blue) (yellow)
42
CHAPTER 4 | PERIPHERY: INNATE IMMUNE RESPONSE
Table I 4 6. Cytokines Involved in Innate Immunity*
Cytokine(s) Cell Secreted by Target Cells/Tissues Activity
Pro inflammatory IL 1 Macrophages Hypothalamus Fever
cytokines
Endothelial cells Increases expression of ICAMs
Liver Stimulates production of acute
phase proteins
IL 6 Macrophages Liver Synthesis of acute phase proteins
TNF α Macrophages Hypothalamus Fever
Endothelial cells Increases expression of ICAMs
Liver Stimulates production of acute
phase proteins
Neutrophils Activation
Tumor cells Apoptosis
Fat, muscle Cachexia
Chemokine IL 8 Macrophages Leukocytes Induces adherence to
endothelium, chemotaxis,
extravasation
IL 12 Macrophages, NK cells IFN γ production
dendritic cells
IL 15 Macrophages NK cells Proliferation
IL 18 Macrophages IFN γ synthesis
Regulatory IL 10 Macrophages, Macrophages, Inhibition of IL 12 production,
dendritic cells dendritic cells decreased expression of co
stimulatory molecules,
decreased class II MHC
expression
Type I IFNs IFN α Dendritic cells, All cells Transient inhibition of protein
macrophages synthesis, increased class I
MHC expression
NK cells Activation
IFN β Fibroblasts All cells Transient inhibition of protein
synthesis, increased class I
MHC expression
NK cells Activation
TGF β Macrophages, Anti inflammatory
lymphocytes, etc.
*Only the innate functions of these cytokines are described here. Many of these cytokines have important functions in the regulation of the
adaptive immune response; those will be discussed in subsequent chapters.
4
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Recall Question
The nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) reduction test is negative in which
of the following?
A. Arginine deficiency
B. Infection with catalase negative organisms
C. Chronic granulomatous disease
D. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
E. Chronic inflammation
Answer: C
Innate Response to Viruses
The innate response to viruses is unique in that it is geared toward eliminating
these intracellular pathogens. The 2 major mechanisms for dealing with viral
infections are IFN α/β and NK cells.
Interferons
Interferons (IFNs) are a family of eukaryotic cell proteins classified according to
the cell of origin. IFN α and IFN β are produced by a variety of virus infected
cells. They do the following:
• Act on target cells to inhibit viral replication, not the virus
• Are not virus specific
Interferon inhibits viral protein synthesis:
• Activation of an RNA endonuclease, which digests viral RNA
• Phosphorylation of protein kinase, which inactivates eIF2, inhibiting viral
protein synthesis
New virus
Virus
Antiviral protein halts
virus production
Interferon
produced
Nucleus
and Nucleu
released
i iii
iii i ii
i i i i
i
i i i
i
Infected Cell Interferon treated Cell
Figure I 4 13. Interferon Production
Figure I 4 13. Interferon Production
44
CHAPTER 4 | PERIPHERY: INNATE IMMUNE RESPONSE
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Therapeutic Use of Interferons
Since the first description of interferons (IFN) 50 years ago, many dramatic
immunomodulatory roles have been discovered for this group of proteins.
As a group, IFNs induce increases in the expression of class I and II MHC
molecules and augment NK cell activity. They increase the efficiency of
presentation of antigens to both cytotoxic and helper cell populations. Cloning
of the genes that encode IFNs α, β, and γ has made it possible to produce
sufficient amounts to make their use clinically practical.
• Interferon α has well known antiviral activity and is used in the treatment
of hepatitis B and C. Within cancer therapy, IFN α has shown promise in
treatment of hairy B cell leukemia, chronic myelogenous leukemia, and
Kaposi sarcoma.
• Interferon β was the first drug shown to have a positive effect on young
adults with multiple sclerosis. Patients enjoy longer periods of remission
and reduced severity of relapses.
• Interferon γ is used in the treatment of chronic granulomatous disease
(CGD). This molecule is a potent inducer of macrophage activation
and a promoter of inflammatory responses. Its application appears to
significantly reverse the CGD patient’s inability to generate toxic oxygen
metabolites inside phagocytic cells.
Fortunately, the side effects of IFN therapy are mild (headache, fever, fatigue)
and diminish with continued treatment. Acetaminophen is helpful.
NK Cells
NK cells are members of the innate branch of the immune response. They exhibit
the capacity to kill virally infected cells and tumor cells. They kill via the same
mechanisms of inducing apoptosis observed with CTLs (granzymes, perforin). NK
activity is increased in the presence of interferons (IFNs) α and β, and IL 12.
NK cells share a common early progenitor with T cells, but they do not develop in
the thymus. They do not express antigen specific receptors or CD3. The markers
used clinically to enumerate NK cells include CD16 (FcRγ) and CD56 (CAM).
Their recognition of targets is not MHC restricted, and their activity does not
generate immunologic memory.
NK cells employ 2 categories of receptors: killer activating receptor (KAR) and
killer inhibitory receptor (KIR). If only KARs are engaged, the target cells will be
killed. If both the KIRs and the KARs are ligated, the target cell lives. Therefore the
inhibitory signals trump the activation signals.
NKG2D is the major KAR expressed by NK cells. There are many ligands for
KARs; the MIC glycoproteins are one type. MIC proteins are stress proteins that
are expressed only when cells are infected or undergoing transformation. Upon the
binding of KAR to a MIC protein, NK cells become cytotoxic, resulting in death of
the target cell.
4
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
The KIRs activate protein tyrosine phosphatases which inhibit intracellular
signaling and activation by removing tyrosine residues from various signaling
molecules. The KIRs on the NK cell bind to a specialized type of MHC class I
antigens called HLA E. HLA E has a ubiquitous tissue distribution, as do the other
class I HLA molecules. The HLA E molecules bind to peptides derived from the
leader sequence of HLA A, -B and –C. HLA E requires a bound peptide for proper
expression within a cell. Therefore, the amount of HLA E expression on a cell is
indicative of the overall well being of the cell. During viral infections or in
transformed cells, the amount of class I HLA expression may be decreased, which
would prevent the leader sequences from binding to HLA E. This would decrease
the expression of HLA E, and make cells susceptible to NK mediated killing.
Interestingly, when NK cells are activated through the FcR (CD16), only one signal
is required because the antibody signals that there is an active infection. This
occurs through a mechanism called antibody dependent cell mediated cytotoxic
ity (ADCC) (see chapter 8).
No killing
KIR
HLA E
NK cell Normal cell
KAR
Stress molecule
Killing
KIR
NK cell
KAR Stress molecule Virus infected
cell
Figure FigurIe 4 I144. 14.ActiAvacttiiovnation ofofNKNKCellsCells
4
CHAPTER 4 | PERIPHERY: INNATE IMMUNE RESPONSE
Recall Question
Which of the following is used in the treatment of chronic
granulomatous disease?
A. Sulfonamides
B. Interferon α
C. Interferon γ
D. Quinolones
E. Nitroblue tetrazolium
Answer: C
4

Secondary Lymphoid Tissue: Innate
5
Immune Response Meets Adaptive
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Demonstrate understanding of inflammatory response
❏ Solve problems concerning structure of and migration to secondary
lymphoid tissue
MIGRATION TO THE SECONDARY LYMPHOID TISSUE
Within a few hours of the initiation of the acute inflammatory response, the
professional APCs that have phagocytosed and processed the invading antigen
begin to leave the area via lymphatic vessels. Dendritic cells are probably the most
efficient of these cells and retract their membranous processes to round up and
begin the journey to the closest lymph node (Figure I 5 1).
As discussed earlier, dendritic cells and other phagocytes such as macrophages
bind to antigens via PRRs, with a limited diversity, such as the TLRs. The activa
tion of the TLRs induces an acute inflammatory response in the tissue, leading to
the production of pro inflammatory cytokines. These cytokines cause a change
in the phenotype of the phagocyte which eventually alters their migration pattern
and enhances their function.
Activated dendritic cells will begin to express a chemokine receptor called CCR7.
CCR7 is activated by chemokines that are produced by the endothelium.
• Chemokines bind to CCR7 on DCs, allowing them to exit the tissue.
• Upon activation, DCs switch focus from antigen capture to
antigen presentation.
• Activated DCs concentrate in draining lymph nodes and become trapped
in the paracortex.
• Naive T cells expressing CCR7 bind to chemokines on HEVs and migrate
to the paracortex.
Considering the vast number of pathogens that enter the body, it would be a
nearly impossible task for the lymphoid cells to travel to all body sites to protect
the host. Thus, the antigens are taken to the secondary lymphoid tissues where
the lymphocytes constantly recirculate in order to come into contact with their
specific antigen.
If the initial tissue damage is sufficient, these cells can also be flushed into blood
vessels, ultimately becoming trapped in the vascular sinusoids of the spleen.
Regardless, the secondary lymphoid organs (lymph nodes and spleen) are the sites
where naive, mature lymphocytes will first be exposed to their specific antigens.
4
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Microbe
Site of infection
Epithelium
Dendritic cell associated antigen
Lymphatic vessel
Blood vessel
Afferent
lymphatic
Antigen transported
via lymphatics
into regional lymph node
or via blood to spleen
Spleen
Lymph node
Efferent
lymphatic
Figure I 5 1. Transportation of Antigen to the Secondary Lymphoid Organs
Figure I 5 1. Transportation of Antigen
to the Secondary Lymphoid Organs
STRUCTURE OF THE SECONDARY LYMPHOID TISSUE
Lymph nodes are small nodular aggregates of secondary lymphoid tissue found
along the lymphatic channels of the body. They are designed to initiate immune
responses to tissue borne antigens.
• Each lymph node is surrounded by a fibrous capsule that is punctured by
afferent lymphatics, which bring lymph into the subcapsular sinus.
• The fluid percolates through an outer cortex area that contains aggregates
of cells called follicles.
• The lymph then passes into the inner medulla and the medullary
sinus before leaving the node through the hilum in an efferent
lymphatic vessel.
• Ultimately, lymph from throughout the body is collected into the thoracic
duct, which empties into the vena cava and returns it to the blood.
5
CHAPTER 5 | SECONDARY LYMPHOID TISSUE: INNATE IMMUNE RESPONSE MEETS ADAPTIVE
Cortex
Germinal center of
Paracortex
follicle (clones dividing)
(T cell rich)
Medulla
Primary follicle
(B cell rich)
Efferent lymphatic
(memory cells exit)
Afferent lymphatic
(Ag enters)
Figure I 5 2. Compartmentalization of a Lymph Node
Figure I 5 2. Compartmentalization of a Lymph Node
Dendritic Cells
Viral antigen T cell area
Macrophages
Bacterium
Figure I 5 3. Location of Macrophages and DCs in Secondary Lymphoid Tissue
Figure I 5 3. Location of Macrophages and DCs in Secondary Lymphoid Tissue
5
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
The spleen is the secondary lymphoid organ that initiates immune responses to
bloodborne antigens. A single splenic artery enters the capsule at the hilum and
branches into arterioles, which become surrounded by cuffs of lymphocytes
known as the periarteriolar lymphoid sheaths (PALS). Lymphoid follicles
surrounded by a rim of lymphocytes and macrophages are attached nearby. This
constitutes the white pulp. The arterioles ultimately end in vascular sinusoids,
which make up the red pulp. From here, venules collect blood into the splenic
vein, which empties into the portal circulation.
Transverse Section Longitudinal Section
of White Pulp of White Pulp
Marginal zone
B cell corona
Germinal center
PALS–mostly T cells
Central arteriole
Marginal sinus
Red pulp
Figure I 5 4. Structure of the Spleen
Figure I 5 4. Structure of the Spleen
ANTIGEN PROCESSING AND PRESENTATION
Exogenous Pathway of MHC Loading
Although some small, easily digestible antigens are almost totally degraded and
exocytosed by phagocytes, the critical first step in the elicitation of the adaptive
immune response to a primary antigenic challenge is the processing of antigen for
the presentation to naive T lymphocytes.
Professional antigen presenting cells (APCs) include dendritic cells, macrophages,
and B cells; their job is to load partially degraded peptides into the groove of the
MHC class II molecules.
The APCs have slightly different functions to help elicit unique immune responses
required to eliminate various types of pathogens.
• Dendritic cells are the most prolific of the APCs, as they do not have to be
activated in order to present antigen to T cells. They constitutively express
the co stimulatory molecules needed to activate the T cells.
• Macrophages help activate the Th1 response by digesting microbes and
presenting them to the T cells to elicit a cell mediated immune response
(see chapter 8).
5
CHAPTER 5 | SECONDARY LYMPHOID TISSUE: INNATE IMMUNE RESPONSE MEETS ADAPTIVE
• B cells present specific protein antigens to T cells to help elicit a humoral
immune response or a Th2 response (see chapter 7). B cells are unique, as
they are the only APCs that specifically recognize antigen via the B cell
receptors (of surface bound antibody).
Table I 5 1. APC Expression of Co stimulatory Molecules, Class II MHC, and Function
Expression of Co stimulatory
APC Molecules Expression of HLA Class II Major Function
Dendritic Constitutive: B7 (B7.2)*, CD40 Constitutive but upregulated by Activation of naïve Th
cells IFN γ cells
Inducible: IFN γ, TLRs
Macrophages Constitutive: B7 (B7.2), CD40 Negative or low level Initiation and effector
expression but induced by IFN γ phase of the Th1
Inducible: IFN γ, TLRs
response for cell
mediated immunity
B cells Constitutive: CD40 Constitutive but upregulated by Initiation of the Th2
IL 4 response for humoral
Inducible: T cells, B7
immunity
*B7.2 is also called CD86.
When MHC class II molecules are produced in the endoplasmic reticulum of an
APC, a protein called the invariant chain (Ii) is synthesized at the same time. The
Ii has a class II invariant chain peptide (CLIP) that binds with high affinity to the
peptide binding cleft of newly synthesized MHC class II molecule. The Ii with its
associated CLIP blocks the peptide binding groove so no normal cellular peptides
can accidentally be attached. The CLIP + Ii is transported in a vesicle to the
location of endocytic vesicles containing the ingested, internalized peptides.
A molecule called HLA DM is found within the late endosome (lysosomal
compartment). It is the job of HLA DM to exchange the CLIP for a phagocytosed
peptide that will bind to the MHC class II molecule with even higher affinity than
the CLIP. Once exchanged for the CLIP, the peptide is loaded on the MHC class II
molecule and the complex is transported to the cell surface, where it will be
accessible for interaction with any T lymphocyte with a complementary TCR. If,
however, the class II molecule does not find a peptide that it can bind with even
higher affinity than the CLIP, the empty class II molecule is unstable and degraded,
and will thus never make it to the cell surface.
5
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Release of invariant
chain, replace with
exogenous protein
Protein antigen Phagolysosome
CLIP
HLA DM
Class CD4
li
II MHC
α
Chaperone
β CD4+
helper
T cell
Golgi
ER
Class I MHC
Figure I 5 5. Exogenous Pathway of Antigen Presentation
Figure I 5 5. Exogenous Pathway of Antigen Presentation
Endogenous Pathway of MHC Loading
The endogenous pathway of antigen processing handles threats to the host which
are intracellular. These might include viruses, altered/mutated genes (from
tumors), or even peptides from phagocytosed pathogens that may escape or be
transported out of phagosomes into the host cell cytoplasm. Intracellular proteins
are routinely targeted by ubiquitin and degraded in proteasomes.
The peptides from these proteins are transported through a peptide transporter
known as the TAP complex (transporter of antigen processing), and into the
endoplasmic reticulum, where they have the opportunity to bind to freshly
synthesized MHC class I molecules.
• The TAP complex includes the TAP proteins that form the tunnel through
which the proteins travel and a bridging protein called tapasin.
• Tapasin bridges the TAP transporter to the MHC class I molecule so that
as these peptides enter the endoplasmic reticulum, they are easily bound
by the newly synthesized and empty class I molecules.
• The peptide MHC class I complexes are then transported to the cell
membrane where they may be presented to CD8+ T lymphocytes
(see chapter 8).
Just as with the MHC class II molecules, MHC class I is unstable without the
addition of peptide and will not be expressed at the cell surface without the
addition of peptide.
5
CHAPTER 5 | SECONDARY LYMPHOID TISSUE: INNATE IMMUNE RESPONSE MEETS ADAPTIVE
Virus in
cytoplasm Synthesized
viral protein
CD8
TAP
Peptides
Ubiquitinated CD8+
protein cytotoxic T
Tapasin Golgi
Proteasome β2m lymphocyte
Phagosome
Chaperone
Class I MHC
Protein from
phagocytesol
pathogen
Figure I 5 6. Endogenous Pathway of Antigen Presentation
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Proteasome Inhibitors in the Treatment of Cancer
By their very nature, oncogenic cells are overly proliferative, requiring a higher
rate of protein synthesis than their normal cell counterparts. A majority of
cellular proteins are degraded via the ubiquitin proteasome pathway, including
many proteins that play a role in maintaining cellular homeostasis. These
include proteins that regulate the cell cycle, apoptosis, etc.
• Proteasome inhibitors induce apoptosis in tumor cells by interfering with
the degradation of these regulatory proteins. For example, proteins that
regulate the cell cycle such as p53 may be inactivated in transformed cells.
This leads to a dysregulation of cell cycle control and a progression of the
tumorigenesis.
• Proteasome inhibitors will produce an accumulation of p53 as well as other
regulatory proteins, and therefore eventual cell death via apoptosis.
Table I 5 2. FDA Approved Proteasome Inhibitors in Clinical Use
Drug Name Use
Bortezomib Currently approved to treat multiple myeloma and mantle
cell lymphoma (clinical trials for leukemia)
Carfilzomib Currently approved to treat multiple myeloma (clinical
trials for leukemia and lymphomas)
5
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Cross Presentation (Cross Priming)
In addition to presenting antigens on MHC class II molecules to CD4+ T cells,
dendritic cells also have a role in presenting antigens to CD8+ T cells in a process
called cross presentation. As professional phagocytes, dendritic cells are able to
ingest a virally MHC class I infected cell in toto and present viral antigens within a
molecule to CD8+ T cells. Therefore, DCs may activate or prime both CD4+ T
cells and CD8+ T cells specific for the same pathogen. This activation may occur
in close proximity, which is important for the activation of naïve CD8+ T cells
into activated CTLs and memory cells. This occurs via the activation of CD4+ T
cells and the production of cytokines such as IL 2 (see chapter 8).
Class II MHC
Dendritic cell
CD8+ T cell
Infected cells
ingested by
host APCs
Virally
infected cell
Class I Costimulator
MHC
Viral antigen
FigureFigure I 5I 57.7. CCrroossss PriPmriimnging
Recall Question
Peptides from intracellular pathogens and altered proteins are
transported to endoplasmic reticulum to be presented on which of
the following molecules?
A. MHC class II
B. MHC class I
C. TAP complex
D. CD28
E. CLIP
Answer: B
5
Secondary Lymphoid Tissue:
6
B and T Lymphocyte Activation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Answer questions about antigen processing and presentation
❏ Explain activation of T and B lymphocytes
ACTIVATION OF T LYMPHOCYTES
Once antigen is processed and presented to a T cell, the adaptive immune response
is initiated. These interactions occur within the secondary lymphoid tissue. The
purpose of these interactions is to generate effector cells, which will ultimately
result in the elimination of the infection.
In order to generate specific effector cells, the activation of T cells via the TCR
must go through several checkpoints to ensure antigen specificity and eventual
T cell activation.
Steps of T Cell Activation
The binding of the TCR of the mature, naive T cell to the MHC peptide complex of
the APC provides the first signal to the T cell to begin its activation. This provides
the antigenic specificity of the response. The interaction is stabilized by the
coreceptors CD4 and CD8 which bind to MHC class II and MHC class I
molecules, respectively.
Intimately associated with the T cell receptor is the CD3 signal transduction
complex. Interaction of cell adhesion molecules on the surface of the APCs and
T cells allows for the formation of the immune synapse.
The costimulatory molecules B7 1 (CD80) and B7 2 (CD86) on APCs bind to
CD28 on the mature, naïve T cells, providing the second signal necessary for
successful activation. Under normal conditions, B7 is expressed at low levels on
APCs. In the presence of infection or inflammation, the expression will increase,
enhancing activation of the mature, naïve T cells. Later in the immune response,
B7 will preferentially bind to CTLA 4 or PD 1, effectively turning off the T cell
response.
Cytokines secreted by APCs and the activating T cells themselves induce the
proliferation (clonal expansion) and differentiation of the T cells into effector
cells and memory cells.
5
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Microbe
Site of infection
Epithelium
Dendritic cell associated antigen
Lymphatic vessel
Blood vessel
Afferent
lymphatic
Antigen transported
via lymphatics
into regional lymph node
or via blood to spleen
Spleen
Lymph node
Efferent
lymphatic
Activation and
differentiation
of T cells. Other cells
will be activated
here as well.
Effector
lymphocytes Memory lymphocyte
Effector lymphocyte
Effector
B lymphocytes
Secreted antibodies
(plasma cells)
Effector T cells, memory
lymphocytes, and antibodies
enter circulation and
recirculate to protect the body.
Figure I 6 1. Production of Effector Cells in
Figure I 6 1. Production of Effector Cells in the Secondary Lymphoid Organs
the Secondary Lymphoid Organs
5
CHAPTER 6 | SECONDARY LYMPHOID TISSUE: B AND T LYMPHOCYTE ACTIVATION
Helper T cell
TCR
IgCAM
CD3 CD4
CD28
IL 1
IL 6 CD40
TNF α B7 Integri
IL 12
MHC class II
Macrophage
Helper T cell
IL 2
receptor
TCR
IgCAM
CD3 CD4 IL 2
CD28
IL 1
IFN γ
IL 6 CD40
TNF α B7 Integrin
IL 12
MHC class II
Macrophage
Helper T cell
IL 2
receptor
TCR
IgCAM
CD3 CD4 IL 2
CD28 CD40L
IL 1
IFN γ
IL 6 CD40
TNF α B7 Integrin
IL 12
MHC class II
Macrophage
Helper T cell
CD28 IL 2
receptor
TCR
CTLA 4 IgCAM
CD3 CD4 IL 2
CD40L
IL 1
IFN γ
IL 6 CD40
TNF α B7 Integrin
IL 12
MHC class II
Macrophage
Figure I 6 2. T Cell Activation
59
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Several surface molecules are involved in the activation of mature, naive
T lymphocytes:
• First (primary) signal: recognition of the MHC:peptide complex by the
T cell receptor and coreceptors (CD4 and CD8)
• Second (costimulatory) signal: recognition of B7 by CD28
CLINICAL CORRELATE
CTLA 4 is an important immunoregulatory molecule in the immune system.
Expressed on both activated Th and Tregs, it is responsible for downregulating
the immune response by competitive binding to B7 1 and B7 2 on APCs.
The manipulation of CTLA 4 has important clinical implications first
elucidated by the creation of CTLA 4 knockout mice that resulted in a fatal
lymphoproliferative disorder. These deletions may also result in several
autoimmune disorders.
• Agonists
– Abatacept: for rheumatoid arthritis
– Belatacept: for renal transplant
• Antagonists
– Ipilimumab: for melanoma, colorectal cancers, and other cancers
The activated CD4+ (helper) T lymphocytes will begin to produce and secrete
cytokines and increase surface expression of cytokine receptors. The first cytokine
produced is IL 2, an autocrine signal, which induces T cell proliferation by
binding to a high affinity IL 2 receptor found on the same cells. Unlike helper
T lymphocytes, activated CD8+ T lymphocytes secrete low levels of IL 2 and are
dependent on the helper T lymphocytes for their proliferation and differentiation.
6
CHAPTER 6 | SECONDARY LYMPHOID TISSUE: B AND T LYMPHOCYTE ACTIVATION
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Superantigens are viral and bacterial proteins that cross link the variable β
domain of a T cell receptor to an α chain of a class II MHC molecule outside
the normal peptide binding groove. This cross linkage provides an activating
signal that induces T cell activation and proliferation, in the absence of
antigen specific recognition of peptides in the MHC class II groove.
Because superantigens bind outside of the antigen binding cleft, they activate
any clones of T cells expressing a particular variable β sequence and thus
cause polyclonal activation of T cells, resulting in the over production of
IFN γ. This, in turn, activates macrophages, resulting in overexpression
of proinflammatory cytokines (IL 1, IL 6 and TNF α). Excess amounts
of these cytokines induce systemic toxicity. Molecules produced during
infectious processes and known to act as superantigens include staphylococcal
enterotoxins, toxic shock syndrome toxin 1 (TSST 1), and streptococcal
pyrogenic exotoxins.
Helper T cell
TCR
CD3 Note that there is no
complementarity between the
CD4 TCR and MHC/peptide complex.
IL 1 Super IFN γ
IL 6 antigen
TNF α
MHC Class II
Macrophage
Superantigen Activation
6
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Recall Question
Blocking CTLA 4 enhances interaction between which of the
following?
A. PD 1 and PDL 1
B. TCR and MHC class II
C. IgCAM and integrin
D. CD40 and CD40L
E. B7 and CD28
Answer: E
Development of the Th1, Th2, and Th17 Subsets
Helper T lymphocytes serve as the orchestrators of virtually all the possible
effector mechanisms that will arise to destroy the pathogen. The effector mecha
nisms that are controlled by Th cells include antibody synthesis, macrophage
activation and CTL killing.
The “decision” as to which of these mechanisms should be engaged is based on the
characteristics of the invading pathogen and is controlled by the differentiation of
specialized classes of helper T cells. All CD4+ T cells require recognition of their
specific antigen complexed to MHC class II by their TCR (first signal) and
costimulation through the binding of B7 on the professional APC by CD28
(costimulatory signal).
There are 3 major classes of helper T (Th) cells that arise from the same precursor,
the naive Th lymphocyte (or Th0 cell):
• Th1
• Th2
• Th17
The pattern of differentiation is determined by the antigen or type of pathogen
causing the infection, the cytokines produced in response to the antigen, and the
transcription factors stimulated by the cytokines.
6
CHAPTER 6 | SECONDARY LYMPHOID TISSUE: B AND T LYMPHOCYTE ACTIVATION
Th0 Extracellular
Intracellular Bacterial and
Infections Fungal Infections
Parasitic
IL 12 Infections
IL 23, IL 6 and TGF β
IL 4
Th1 Th2 Th17
T bet GATA3 RORYT
IFN γ IL 4, IL 5, IL 10, IL 13 and TGF β IL 17 and IL 22
• Amplifies Th1 response • IL 4 amplifies Th2 response • IL 17 activates tissue cells and leukocytes
• Inhibits Th2 response • IL 4 and IL 10 inhibit Th1 response to secrete inflammatory cytokines leading
• Activates classic macrophage • IL 5 drives eosinophil maturation to recruitment of neutrophils
• Drives isotype switching to IgG • Activates alternate macrophage • IL 17 and IL 22 act on epithelial cells to
• IL 4 and IL 13 drive isotype switching to IgE secrete anti microbials and improve
and alternative macrophage activation barrier function
• IL 5 and TGF β drive isotype switching to IgA*
*Mucosal cells at the site of infection and Tregs can also secrete TGF β, causing isotype switching to IgA.
Figure I 6 3. Subsets of Helper T Cells
Figure I 6 3. Subsets of Helper TCells
Differentiation of a Th0 cell into a Th1 cell is stimulated by Intracellular pathogens
(e.g., viruses and intracellular bacteria). These pathogens induce a strong innate
immune response with the resultant production of IL 12 by macrophages and
IFN γ by NK cells increasing the expression of the transcription factor T bet.
In turn, Th1 cells secrete high levels of the inflammatory cytokine IFN γ which
does the following:
• Amplifies the Th1 response
• Inhibits the Th2 response
• Activates classical macrophage
• Enhances isotype switching to IgG
Differentiation of a Th0 cell into a Th2 cell seems to be encouraged in response to
large extracellular parasites such as helminths or allergens. Due to the inability
to phagocytose these pathogens, there is no significant macrophage or NK cell
stimulation. In this way, naive Th0 cells seem to produce IL 4 constitutively, and
in the absence of IL 12 stimulation, these cells will upregulate their production
of IL 4 to encourage differentiation into Th2 cells by induction of the transcription
factor GATA 3. Additional IL 4 is produced by the activation of mast cells and
eosinophils by the helminths or allergens further driving differentiation into Th2
cells.
6
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Several cytokines are produced by Th2 cells, including IL 4, IL 5, IL 10, IL 13 and
TGF β.
• IL 4 causes B lymphocytes to isotype switch predominantly to IgE, which
will bind to mast cells, eosinophils and basophils.
• In collaboration with IL 13, IL 4 enhances alternative macrophage
activation for tissue repair and increased intestinal mucus secretion and
peristalsis.
• The combination of IL 4, IL 10, and IL 13 together promotes a Th2
response while inhibiting the Th1 response.
• IL 5 drives maturation and activation of eosinophils.
Differentiation of a Th0 cell into a Th17 cell occurs in the presence of extracellular
bacterial and fungal infections. Local cells react to the infection by secreting IL 1,
IL 6, IL 23, and TGF β, inducing the expression of the transcription factor
RORγ T in the Th17 cells. The activated Th17 cells will in turn secrete the cyto
kines IL 17 and IL 22.
• IL 17 induces local cells to increase chemokine production recruiting
neutrophils.
• IL 22 stabilizes interactions between cells in the endothelium decreasing
permeability.
• IL 17 and IL 22 induce secretion of anti microbials by the endothelium.
Another population of T cells that arises from the Th0 is the T regulatory cell
(TReg cell). TReg cells regulate (inhibit) Th1 cell function.
• Identified by their constitutive expression of CD25 on the surface and by
the expression of the transcription factor FoxP3
• Secrete inflammation inhibiting cytokines such as IL 10 and TGF β
• Have been shown to be critical for the prevention of autoimmunity
Development of Cytotoxic T Lymphocytes
Like CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells require both a primary and a costimulatory
signal to become activated. The main difference between them is that CD8+ T
cells recognize their specific antigen presented by MHC class I molecules and rely
upon the cytokines produced by T helper cells to proliferate and ultimately
differentiate into cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs).
6
CHAPTER 6 | SECONDARY LYMPHOID TISSUE: B AND T LYMPHOCYTE ACTIVATION
CLINICAL CORRELATE
The progression of disease with Mycobacterium leprae in humans is a well
documented example of the crucial balance between Th1 and Th2 subsets.
Leprosy is not a single clinical entity, but rather a spectrum of diseases, with
tuberculoid and lepromatous forms at the far poles.
• In tuberculoid leprosy, the patient has a strong Th1 response, which
eradicates the intracellular pathogens by granuloma formation. There is
some damage to skin and peripheral nerves, but the disease progresses
slowly, if at all, and the patient survives.
• In lepromatous leprosy, the Th2 response is turned on, and because of
reciprocal inhibition, the cell mediated response is depressed. Patients
develop antibodies to the pathogen that are not protective, and the
mycobacteria multiply inside macrophages, sometimes reaching levels of
1010 per gram of tissue. Hypergammaglobulinemia may occur, and these
cases frequently progress to disseminated and disfiguring infections.
ACTIVATION OF B LYMPHOCYTES
As mature naive B lymphocytes leave the bone marrow following successful
rearrangement of their membrane immunoglobulin receptor genes, they recircu
late throughout the body, attracted to follicular areas of the lymph nodes and
spleen. If antigen entering these secondary lymphoid organs binds to and cross
links the idiotypes of the immunoglobulin, this provides the first signal for the
activation of the B lymphocyte.
The antigens that B lymphocytes encounter are divided into 2 categories: thymus
independent (TI) antigens and thymus dependent (TD) antigens.
1
2
B cell 1 B cell Th cell
2
CD40/CD40L
TI 1 antigen TD antigen
Figure FigureI 6I46. 4.TITIvevrseurssus TDTDAntAignetnigsens
6
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
TI Antigen Activated B Lymphocytes
Certain mature, naïve B lymphocytes are capable of being activated by macromol
ecules such as lipids, polysaccharides, and lipopolysaccharides without having to
interact with helper T cells. These antigens are called thymus independent (TI)
antigens, and they directly stimulate B cells to proliferate and differentiate into
plasma cells.
• The response to TI antigens is generally weaker than the response to TD
antigens, resulting primarily in the secretion of IgM antibodies and the
absence of immunologic memory.
• TI antigens may also act as B cell mitogens, directly causing mitosis
regardless of the cell’s antigenic specificity.
• B lymphocytes activated by TI antigens are found in the spleen and
mucosa.
• The marginal zone B cells are found in the periphery of the splenic white
pulp and the B 1 cells in association with the mucosa and peritoneum.
TD Antigen Activated B Lymphocytes
Most antigens introduced in the body fall into the category of thymus dependent
(TD) antigens. Response to such molecules requires the direct contact of B cells
with helper T cells and are influenced by cytokines secreted by these cells. After
the cross linking of receptors on the B cell surface with antigen, the material is
endocytosed and processed via the exogenous pathway to generate an MHC class
II:peptide complex, which is then inserted into the membrane of the professional
APCs.
Simultaneously, expression of B7 is upregulated on the B lymphocytes, making the
cells effective presenters of antigen to CD4+ T cells in the area. Once a CD4+ T
cell recognizes its specific peptide displayed on MHC class II molecules, the 2 cells
form a conjugate.
• The CD4+ T cell is activated and differentiates into a helper T cell.
• The helper T cells rearrange their Golgi apparatus toward the junction
with the B cell leading to the directional release of cytokines.
• Expression of CD40L on the surface of the helper T cell is upregulated and
interacts with CD40 on the B cell to provide the second signal for B cell
activation.
• The B cells respond by proliferating and differentiating into plasma cells
and memory B cells.
6
CHAPTER 6 | SECONDARY LYMPHOID TISSUE: B AND T LYMPHOCYTE ACTIVATION
B Lymphocyte Naïve T Lymphocyte
CD28
MHC II TCR
CD4
CD40
CD28
B7
CD40L
CD40
Cytokines
Activated B cell
Proliferating B cells
Figure FiguIre6 5I.6 S5te.psSteps ininTTCCeellll DDepeepnednednetnt B CellBACcteivllationActivation
6
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
B lymphocytes activated by TD antigens are released in 2 subsequent waves.
• The primary wave of activated B lymphocytes is comprised of strictly
IgM secreting plasma cells which leave the secondary lymphoid tissue
shortly after being activated.
• The second wave of activated B lymphocytes remains within the follicles
of the secondary lymphoid tissue undergoing clonal expansion producing
the germinal center. During the expansion, the clones will undergo
affinity maturation and isotype switching.
Affinity Maturation
During the activation of B lymphocytes by helper T cells, intense proliferation of
the B cells results in the formation of germinal centers in the follicles of the
secondary lymphoid tissues. These are clones of proliferating, antigen specific
cells. During the intense proliferative response of the B cell, random mutations in
the coding of the variable domain region may occur. This is called somatic
hypermutation and creates single point mutations in the antibody idiotype. If
these slightly altered idiotypes have increased affinity for the antigen, then the cell
expressing them will be at a selective advantage in competing to bind antigen.
Because binding antigen serves as the first signal for proliferation, over time clones
of cells with higher receptor affinity will begin to predominate in the germinal
center. This clonal selection results in the predominance of clones capable of
producing antibodies with increasing affinity for the antigen, a process known as
affinity maturation.
This means that although isotype switching will necessarily decrease the avidity of
the preponderance of antibody molecules as the immune response evolves, this
will be substituted by an increase in antibody affinity over time.
Isotype Switching
Although all of the antibody molecules secreted by a clone of B lymphocytes will
have an identical idiotype (see chapter 3), the B cell is induced to make new classes
(isotypes) of immunoglobulin in response to cytokine directed instruction from
the helper T cells.
As the B lymphocyte receives cytokine signals from the helper T cells in the
secondary lymphoid organs, it is induced to undergo isotype switching, changing
the heavy chain constant domains to classes of antibodies with new and different
effector functions. It does this by rearranging the DNA encoding the constant
regions of the heavy chain by activating switch regions that cause the intervening
DNA to be looped out, excised, and degraded. The idiotype is then joined to a new
constant region domain, resulting in an antibody molecule with identical antigenic
specificity but a new effector function. This isotype switch is one way; the excised
DNA is degraded so a cell that has begun to produce an isotype downstream from
IgM coding can never produce IgM again.
6
CHAPTER 6 | SECONDARY LYMPHOID TISSUE: B AND T LYMPHOCYTE ACTIVATION
This is why IgM is the principal immunoglobulin of the primary immune
response when antigen is first encountered, and it is replaced in later responses
by antibodies of different isotypes. Although IgM antibodies are occasionally
produced at low levels during secondary and later immunologic responses, they
are always produced by cells encountering that antigen for the first time; namely,
mature, naive B cells newly emerging from the bone marrow.
Switch regions
V -D -J μ δ γ3 γ1 α1 γ2 γ4 ε α2
δ
γ
μ
V -D -J γ1
Figure I 6 6. Immunoglobulin Heavy Chain Switching
Figure I 6 6. Immunoglobulin Heavy Chain Switching
69

7
Humoral Immunity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Explain information related to the primary humoral response
❏ Answer questions about antibodies of secondary immune responses
PRIMARY HUMORAL RESPONSE
The first isotype of immunoglobulin that can be produced by a B cell with or
without T cell help is IgM. This is because coding for the constant domains of the
heavy chain of IgM (μ chains) are the first sequences downstream from the coding
for the idiotype of the molecule.
The IgM molecule on the surface of the B cell is a monomer, but the secreted form
of this molecule is a pentamer, held together in an extremely compact form by a
J chain synthesized by the cell.
Light chain
constant region
Light chain
variable region
Joining (J) chain
μ heavy chain
variable region
μ heavy chain IgM monomer
constant region
Figure I 7 1. IgM Pentamer
Figure I 7 1. IgM Pentamer
The design of the IgM pentamer maximizes its effect critical to the body early
during antigenic challenge. Because of its multimeric structure (5 of the Y shaped
monomers joined into one unit), plasma IgM has 5 times the capacity for binding
antigenic epitopes. The valence of the molecule is therefore 10. In other words,
10 identical epitopes can be simultaneously bound, as compared with 2 for the
monomeric structure.
7
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
This design makes IgM the most effective immunoglobulin isotype at “sponging”
the free antigen out of the tissues, and proves critical—as the humoral response
evolves—in trapping antigen so it can be presented to the lymphocytes that will
ultimately refine the choice of effector mechanism. Although the affinity (binding
strength) of the idiotype for the epitope may not be strong early in the immune
response, the IgM molecule possesses the highest avidity (number of antigen
binding sites available to bind epitopes) of any immunoglobulin molecule
produced in the body.
IgG
IgM
t
i
d
i
v
A
Affinity
FigureFigureI 7I 27. 2.AfAfifnfiitnyity anadndAvidAitvyidity
The multimeric structure of IgM also makes it the most effective antibody at
activating complement, a set of serum proteases important in mediating inflam
mation and antigen removal. Serum IgM is incapable of binding to cellular Fc
receptors and thus cannot act as an opsonin (see chapter 4) or a mediator of
antibody dependent cell mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) (see chapter 8).
CLINICAL CORRELATE
X linked hyper IgM syndrome is characterized by a deficiency of IgG, IgA,
and IgE and elevated levels of IgM. IgM levels can reach 2,000 mg/dL (normal
45–250 mg/dL). It is most commonly inherited as an X linked recessive
disorder, but some forms seem to be acquired and can be seen in both sexes.
• Peripheral blood of patients has high numbers of IgM secreting plasma
cells, as well as autoantibodies to neutrophils, platelets, and red blood cells.
• Patients fail to make germinal centers during a humoral immune response.
• Children with this condition suffer recurrent respiratory infections,
especially those caused by Pneumocystis jirovecii.
The defect in this syndrome is in the gene encoding the CD40 ligand,
which maps to the X chromosome. Therefore, Th cells in these patients
will fail to express functional CD40L on their membrane, failing to give the
costimulatory signal needed for the B cell response to T dependent antigens.
As a result, only IgM antibodies are produced. The B cell response to
T independent antigens is unaffected.
72
CHAPTER 7 | HUMORAL IMMUNITY
ANTIBODIES OF SECONDARY IMMUNE RESPONSES
Class Switching to IgG
The preponderant isotype of immunoglobulin that begins to be produced after
IgM during the primary immune response is IgG. IgG is a monomeric molecule
with a γ heavy chain and a new set of effector functions. A majority of IgG is
produced in response to IFN γ produced by the Th1 cells.
IgG exists in 4 subisotypes (subclasses) in humans—IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, and
IgG4—each of which exhibits a slightly different capacity in effector function. In
general, however, IgG has the following characteristics:
• Activates complement
• Acts as an opsonin, enhancing phagocytosis
• Neutralizes pathogen and toxins
• Mediates ADCC
IgG is also actively transported across the placenta by receptor mediated transport
and thus plays a crucial role in protection of the fetus during gestation.
Antigen binding sites
Variable light
chain domain
Variable γ heavy chain domain
Constant light
chain domain Constant γ heavy chain domain
Light chain κ
or λ class Hinge region
Complement
binding region
Cell receptor binding region
Figure I 7 3. Basic Structure of lgG
Figure I 7 3. Basic Structure of IgG
Class Switching to IgA
Another isotype of antibody that can be produced following class switching is IgA,
though it is more commonly produced in the submucosa than in the lymph nodes
and spleen. IgA generally exists as a dimer, held together by a Jchain similar to
that produced with IgM. IgA has the following characteristics:
• Serves as a major protective defense of the mucosal surfaces of the body
• Any pathogen that infects the mucosa will induce IgA production by the
secretion of TGF β by infected cells and to a lesser extent, IL 5.
• Functions as a neutralizing antibody by inhibiting the binding of toxins or
pathogens to the mucosa of the digestive, respiratory, and urogenital
systems (sole function)
7
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
• Does not activate complement, act as an opsonin, or mediate ADCC
• Exists in 2 isotypes, IgA1 and IgA2
The classical pathway is activated by antigen antibody complexes and is probably
the more phylogenetically advanced system of activation. Both IgG and IgM can
activate the system by this pathway, although IgM is the more efficient.
Although the complement cascade is considered a component of the innate
immune response, its overlapping stimulation of effector functions of cells of the
adaptive immune response, as well as its role in enhancement of inflammation,
make it a critical effector system for removal of extracellular invaders and concen
tration of antigens into the secondary lymphoid organs, where the adaptive
immune responses are elicited.
The homing of specific memory cells to epithelial and mucosal surfaces leads to
the production of specialized lymphoid aggregations along these barriers.
Collectively referred to as mucosal associated lymphoid tissues (MALT), they
include the tonsils and Peyer patches, as well as numerous, less well organized
lymphoid accumulations in the lamina propria. Th2 cells in these sites are dedi
cated to providing help for class switching to IgA. Most IgA secreting B lympho
cytes and plasma cells in the body will be found in these locations.
α Heavy chain
Joining (J) chain
Figure FigurIe 7 I4.7 T4h.eTheIgAIgA DDiimmeerr
Secretory IgA (that which is released across the mucosa of the respiratory,
digestive, and urogenital tracts) differs from serum IgA in an important fashion.
As the IgA dimer is produced by plasma cells and B lymphocytes, it becomes
bound to poly Ig receptors on the basolateral side of the epithelia, is endocytosed,
and is released into the lumen bound to a secretory piece that is the residue of the
receptor. The secretory component thus serves an important function in transepi
thelial transport, and once in the lumen of the tract, has a function in protecting
the molecule from proteolytic cleavage.
7
CHAPTER 7 | HUMORAL IMMUNITY
Plasma cell
IgA dimer
Mucosa
J chain
Poly Ig receptor
Dimer is
internalized
and crosses
cytoplasm
Epithelial cells
Secretory
component (SC)
Secretory IgA
Figure I 7 5. Secretory IgA
Figure I 7 5. Secretory IgA
Class Switching to IgE
IgE binds directly to Fcε receptors present on mast cells, eosinophils and basophils,
and is involved in elicitation of protective immune responses against parasites and
allergens (see chapter 12). It does not activate complement or act as an opsonin. Its
heavy chain is called the ε chain.
Complement
components
in blood C6 9
C3
C4 C2
C1 C5
C1 C4a C2b C3a C5a
C4
C2 C3 C5
IgM or
≥2 IgG C5b
C4b C2a C2a 6 7 8 9 9
Cell membrane
C3 convertase C5 convertase Membrane
(e.g., of bacterium) attack complex →
‘b’ fragments are usually puts holes
membrane/surface bound in membrane
Excess C3b deposited on
cell/particle surface →
binds C3b receptors on phagocytes
Figure I 7 6. Classical Complement Pathway
Figure I 7 6. Classical Complement Pathway
75
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Table I 7 1. Biologic Functions of the Antibody Isotypes
IgM IgG IgA IgD IgE
Heavy chain μ γ α δ ε
Adult serum levels (in mg/dL) 45–250 620–1,400 80–350 Trace Trace
Functions
Complement activation, classic
+ + - - -
pathway
Neutralization +/ + + - -
Opsonization
+ - - -
Antibody dependent cell mediated - + - - +/
cytotoxicity (ADCC)
Placental transport + - -
Naive B cell antigen receptor -+ - - + -
Memory B cell antigen receptor - + + - +
(one only)
Trigger mast cell granule release - - - - +
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Immunodeficiencies Involving B Lymphocytes
Patients with B cell deficiencies usually present with recurrent pyogenic
infections with extracellular pathogens. The absence of immunoglobulins for
opsonization and complement activation is a major problem (see chapter 11).
• T cell immune system is intact.
• T cell activities against intracellular pathogens, delayed type
hypersensitivity, and tumor rejection are normal (see chapter 8).
Recall Question
Which of the following functions is unique to IgG?
A. Placental transport
B. Neutralization and complement activation
C. Triggering mast cell granule release
D. Neutralization and ADCC
E. Opsonization and crossing the placenta
Answer: E
7
8
Cell Mediated Immunity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Describe the role of macrophages, B cells, cytotoxic T lymphocytes,
and NK cells
❏ Demonstrate understanding of antibody dependent cell mediated
cytotoxicity
❏ Demonstrate understanding of agglutination
❏ Answer questions about ABO testing
❏ Demonstrate understanding of lab tests, including labeled antibody
systems, fluorescent antibody tests, enzyme linked immunosorbent
assay, and fluorescence activated cell sorting
CELL MEDIATED IMMUNITY
Cell mediated immunity has evolved to battle 2 different types of pathogens:
• Facultative intracellular pathogens, which have adapted to living inside
of phagocytic cells that are designed to kill them
• Obligate intracellular pathogens, which can’t replicate outside of host
cells
Cell mediated immunity is dictated by the Th1 response and is mediated primarily
via macrophages and CD8+ T cells. While the Th1 response is geared toward
eliminating intracellular pathogens, Th cells—in general—direct all aspects of the
immune system.
The primary mechanism by which Th cells direct all aspects of immunity is the
secretion of cytokines. NK cells also have a role in this type of immunity; they
were covered in chapter 4 and will be reviewed here.
MACROPHAGES/B CELLS
The Th1 response activates both macrophages and B cells via the cytokine IFN γ.
IFN γ activates classical M1 macrophages to eradicate intracellular pathogens and
induces B cells to class switch to produce opsonizing IgG antibodies that can assist
the macrophages with phagocytosis.
7
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Bacteria APCNaive T Cell
TH1 Cells
H
IFN γ IFN γ
Macrophage
B Cell
Complement binding
and opsonizing IgG
antibodies
Fc receptor
Classical macrophage
activation (enhanced
microbial killing)
Opsonization and
phagocytosis
Figure I 8 1. Cell Mediated Immunity
Figure I 8 1. Cell Mediated Immunity
Macrophage Th Cell Interaction
The binding of the TCR of the naive Th cell to the MHC class II–peptide complex
of the macrophage provides the first signal to the T cell to begin its activation. This
provides the antigenic specificity of the response.
• Co stimulatory molecules on macrophage provide the second signal, and
cytokines secreted by the macrophage and the activating T cells them
selves induce the proliferation (clonal expansion) and differentiation of the
T cells into effector cells and memory cells.
• Effector cells leave the secondary lymphoid tissue, enter into circulation,
and travel to the site of the infection.
Table I 8 1. Macrophage Molecules and Function
Cell CD Markers MHC class I Effector Mechanisms
Macrophage CD14 (LPS receptor) yes Nitric oxide, oxygen
radicals, TNF α
7
CHAPTER 8 | CELL MEDIATED IMMUNITY
Microbe
Site of infection
Epithelium
Dendritic cell associated antigen
Lymphatic vessel
Blood vessel
Afferent
lymphatic
Antigen transported
via lymphatics
into regional lymph node
or via blood to spleen
Spleen
Lymph node
Efferent
lymphati
Activation and
differentiation
of T cells. Other cells
will be activated
here as well.
Effector
lymphocytes Memory lymphocyte
Effector lymphocyte
Effector
B lymphocytes
Secreted antibodies
(plasma cells)
Effector T cells, memory
lymphocytes, and antibodies
enter circulation and
recirculate to protect the body.
Figure I 8 2. Migration of Effector Cells to the Site of Infection
Figure I 8 2. Migration of Effector Cells to the Site of Infection
The proliferation of naive T cells in response to antigen recognition is mediated
principally by an autocrine growth pathway, in which the responding T cell
secretes its own growth promoting cytokines and also expresses receptor molecules
for these factors. IL 2 is the most important growth factor for T cells and stimulates
the proliferation of clones of T cells specific to that antigen. Additionally, the T cells
provide IFN γ, which promotes macrophage activation that also helps to activate
Th cells. The production of IL 12 by the macrophage also helps to activate the Th
cells. Together, IL 12 and IFN γ also help to promote the differentiation of the
naïve Th cell into a Th1 cell.
79
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
The reaction mediated by the Th1 cell via macrophage and CD8+ T cell activation
is often referred to as the delayed type hypersensitivity (DTH) reaction. Although
this is the normal response of the body to intracellular pathogens, it is the exact
same mechanism of cellular interactions and cytokine production as a hypersensi
tivity to poison ivy or nickel (see chapter 12).
CYTOTOXIC T LYMPHOCYTES
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) recognize the cell they will ultimately kill by
interaction between their TCR and the MHC class I peptide complex on the
surface of the target cell.
• If the cell in question is performing normal functions and therefore
producing normal “self” peptides, there should be no CD8+ T cells that
have a complementary TCR structure.
• If the cell is infected with an intracellular pathogen or is expressing
neoantigens reflective of tumor transformation, some small proportion
of those CD8+ T cells generated from the thymus should be capable of
binding their TCRs to this MHC class I/non self peptide complex.
Unfortunately, because of the extreme polymorphism of the HLA (MHC) system
in humans, when tissues are transplanted between nonidentical individuals, cells
of the transplant are often targeted by CTLs as abnormal. In spite of the fact that
they may only be presenting normal cellular peptides, in these cases the HLA
molecules themselves are different enough to elicit an immune response (see
chapter 13). CTLs are capable of differentiation and cloning by themselves in the
presence of the appropriate MHC class I/non self peptide complex stimulus, but
are much more effective in so doing if they are assisted by signals from Th1 cells.
The Th1 cell secretes IL 2, which acts on CD8+ cells to enhance their differentia
tion and cloning. This occurs via cross priming as discussed in chapter 5. Addi
tionally, interferons produced in the area will increase the expression of MHC
molecules to make target cells more susceptible to killing.
CTLs kill their target cells by the delivery of toxic granule contents that induce the
apoptosis of the cell to which they attach. This process occurs in 4 phases:
• Attachment to the target cell (mediated by TCR, CD8, and LFA 1 integrin)
• Activation (cytoskeletal rearrangement to concentrate granules against
attached target cell)
• Exocytosis of granule contents (perforin and granzymes)
• Detachment from the target cell
The death of the target cell may be mediated in distinct fashions:
• Perforin present in the CTL granules creates pores in the membrane of the
target cell through which granzymes (serine proteases) enter the cell,
inducing the activation of caspases, which activate the “death domain.”
• Cytokines such as IFN γ with TNF α or TNF β can induce apoptosis.
• Activated CTLs express a membrane protein called Fas ligand (FasL),
which may bind to its complementary structure, Fas, on the target cell.
When this occurs, caspases are induced and death results.
8
CHAPTER 8 | CELL MEDIATED IMMUNITY
Table I 8 2. Cytotoxic T Cell Markers and Function
Cell CD Markers MHC class I Effector Mechanisms
CTL CD8, CD3, TCR, CD2 Yes Perforin, granzymes, cytokines
Apoptosis of target cell
Target cell
Granzymes enter through perforin
holes, activation of caspases
CD8+
CTL
A: Perforin and Granzymes
Fas on the target cell
Apoptosis of target cell
interacts with FasL on CTL
TNF
CD8+
CTL
B: Fas/FasL Interaction
Figure IFig8ure3. IM8ech3a.nismMsechanisms ofofCyCtyottootxoixcic TTCelClellKillinKgilling
Recall Question
To induce apoptosis, FasL membrane proteins on CTLs bind to Fas
on target cells and activate which of the following?
A. Perforin
B. Granzymes
C. Caspases
D. IFN α
E. IFN γ
Answer: C
8
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
NK CELLS
Another cell mediated effector mechanism enhanced by the action of Th1 cells is
NK cell killing. Since the innate function of NK cells was discussed in chapter 4,
the table below summarizes that information.
Table I 8 3. NK Cell Markers and Function
Cell CD Markers MHC class I Effector Mechanisms
NK CD16 (FcR)* Inhibited by the normal Perforin, granzymes,
expression of class I cytokines
CD56 (CAM)
MHC via HLA E.
(identical to CTL)**
*Keep in mind that CD16 is an FcR and is present on cells other than NK cells.
**The effector mechanisms of NK cell killing are identical to CTLs; the only difference
between them is how they recognize the antigen.
ADCC
A final mechanism of cytotoxicity which bridges humoral and cell mediated
effector systems in the body is antibody dependent cell mediated cytotoxicity
(ADCC). A number of cells with cytotoxic potential (NK cells, macrophages,
neutrophils, and eosinophils) have membrane receptors for the Fc region of IgG
(aka CD16). When IgG is specifically bound to a target cell, the cytotoxic cells can
bind to the free Fc “tail” and subsequently cause lysis of the target cell.
Although these effectors are not specific for antigen, the specificity of the idiotype
of the antibody directs their cytotoxicity. The mechanism of target cell killing in
these cases may involve the following:
• Lytic enzymes
• Tumor necrosis factor
• Perforin/granzymes
8
CHAPTER 8 | CELL MEDIATED IMMUNITY
Neutrophil Macrophage
Lytic enzymes
Perforin
TNF
Granzymes
Target cell
Surface antigen
IgG bound to
Ag and Fc receptor
Eosinophil
Fc receptors
NK cell
Figure I 8 4. Antibody Dependent Cell Mediated Cytotoxicity
Figure I 8 4. Antibody Dependent Cell Mediated Cytotoxicity
8

Immunodiagnostics 9
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Describe the recirculation pattern of memory B and T lymphocytes
❏ Differentiate between primary and secondary immune response
SEROLOGY
Serology is an important diagnostic tool for many diseases including infections
and autoimmune disorders. The interaction of antigen and antibody that occurs in
vivo and in clinical laboratory settings provides the basis for all serologically based
tests.
IgM and IgG
IgM is the principal immunoglobulin of the primary immune response when
antigen is first encountered. It is replaced in later responses by antibodies of
different isotypes, mostly IgG in the serum. Although IgM antibodies are occa
sionally produced at low levels during secondary and later immunologic respons
es, they are always produced by cells encountering that antigen for the first time.
IgM is extremely important in diagnosis of recent infections and infections in
neonates or fetuses. For example, a patient with IgM antibodies to the core antigen
of HBV (HBcAb) is an important diagnostic tool because it suggests a recent or
acute infection and may also be found in the window period when other antibod
ies may not be detectable.
Also, we can make certain assumptions based on serology using IgM in the
diagnoses of neonatal or fetal infections. For example, a neonate that is making
IgM specific for a virus such as rubella is infected with the virus rather than
immune or protected by maternal antibodies. This is because IgM does not cross
the placenta. Therefore, the only way a neonate or fetus can produce IgM for a
certain pathogen is if the neonate or fetus were infected with that agent.
The predominant isotype of immunoglobulin that begins to be produced after IgM
during the primary immune response is IgG.
8
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Primary antigenic Secondary antigenic
challenge challenge
Log
Primary Secondary
Ab
response response
Titer
IgG
IgM
Figure I 9 1. Primary and Secondary Antibody Responses
Figure I 9 1. Primary and Secondary Antibody Responses
Ideotype, Isotype, and Allotype
The unique pocket created by the variable regions of the light chain and the heavy
chain is called the idiotype of the antibody. It is the region that is specific for
antigen. It is both extremely diverse and specific. Each individual is capable of
producing hundreds of millions of unique idiotypes.
The isotype of the antibody is determined by the constant region and is encoded
by the heavy chain genes. The isotype of the antibody determines its function.
The allotype of an antibody is an allelic difference in the same antibody isotypes
that differ between people. For example, 2 individuals with the same IgG have
subtle differences in their immunoglobulins due to heterogeneity which tends to
be specific for individuals. A patient receiving pooled gamma globulins might
react to these allotypic differences in the constant regions which may result in type
III hypersensitivity reactions.
8
CHAPTER 9 | IMMUNODIAGNOSTICS
Antigen binding site
Antigen binding site
N N
N VL Light chain N
S
S
S
S S
S
S
S
VH
CL
S
S S
S S Determines
S
S
Heavy chain C 1H S S S idiotype
C C S
Hinge
S S
S S
S S
C 2H
S S
Determines
isotype
S S
C 3H
S S
C C
Figure I 9 2. B Lymphocyte Antigen Recognition Molecule
Figure(MembIra9ne2. B LymphBocoyutned AInmtimgeunnoglobRuelcino)gnition Molecule
(Membrane Bound Immunoglobulin)
IgG1 (kappa) IgG1 (kappa)
Person 1 Person 2
Figure I 9 3. Allotypes
Figure I 9 3. Allotypes
87
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Papain versus Pepsin Digestion
The biologic function of segments of the antibody molecule was first elucidated by
digestion of these molecules with proteolytic enzymes. If an antibody molecule is
digested with papain, cleavage occurs above the disulfide bonds that hold the heavy
chains together. This generates 3 separate fragments, two of which are called Fab
(fragment antigen binding), and one of which is called Fc (fragment crystallizable).
Cleavage of the antibody molecule with pepsin generates one large fragment
called F(ab ́)2 and a digested Fc fragment. The bridging of antigens by antibody
molecules is required for agglutination of particulate antigens or the precipitation
of soluble antigens.
Fab
Papain site
Fc
Proteolytic Cleavage with Papain
F(ab')2
Pepsin
sites
Fragments
Proteolytic Cleavage with Pepsin
Figure I 9 4. Proteolytic Cleavage of Immunoglobulin by Papain/Pepsin
Figure I 9 4. Proteolytic Cleavage of Immunoglobulin by Papain/Pepsin
8
CHAPTER 9 | IMMUNODIAGNOSTICS
Zone of Equivalence
Interaction of antigen and antibody occurs in vivo, and in clinical settings it
provides the basis for all serologically based assays. The formation of immune
complexes produces a visible reaction that is the basis of precipitation and aggluti
nation assays. Agglutination and precipitation are maximized when multiple
antibody molecules share the binding of multiple antigenic determinants, a
condition known as equivalence.
In vivo, the precipitation of such complexes from the blood is critical to the
trapping of pathogens and the initiation of the immune response in the secondary
lymphoid organs, as well as the initiation of the pathologic phase of many immune
complex mediated diseases. In vitro, the kinetics of such reactions can be observed
by titration of antigen against its specific antibody.
Antigen excess Equivalence Antibody excess
zone zone zone
Excess Ag + + + + +
Supernatants
Excess Ab + + + +
Ag/Ab Precipitate
Antibody Added
Figure I 9 5. Precipitation of Ag–Ab Complexes
Figure I 9 5. Precipitation of Ag–Ab Cdoumrinpglexes Titradtuiorinng TitraotifonAg ofwitAhg witAhb Ab
Figure I 9 5 demonstrates the normal progression of the antibody response during
many infectious diseases.
• At the start of the infection, the patient is in a state of antigen excess; the
pathogen is proliferating in the host and the development of specific
antibodies has not yet begun.
• As the patient begins to make an adequate antibody response, he enters
the equivalence zone; all available antigen is complexed with antibody, and
neither free antigen nor free antibody can be detected in the serum.
• Finally, as the infection is resolved, the patient enters the antibody excess
zone, when more antibody is being produced than is necessary to precipi
tate all available antigen.
8
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
The clinical demonstration of this phenomenon is most easily seen in our use of
the serologic diagnosis of hepatitis B infection.
• Early in the course of this infection, HBsAg is easily detectable in the
blood. The patient is in the antigen excess zone for this antigen.
• As the patient enters the window period (the equivalence zone), the
HBsAg disappears from the circulation because it is being removed by
antibody precipitation.
• Finally, antibody titers (HBsAb) rise in the serum as the patient enters the
antibody excess zone and resolves the infection.
Although the “window period” in the hepatitis B infection is used exclusively to note
the absence of HBsAg and HBsAb from the serum (only antigen–antibody response
that has a clinical significance in the prognosis of disease). An equivalence zone is a
universal stage in the development of any antibody–antigen interaction.
Monoclonal versus Polyclonal Antiserum
Polyclonal antiserum is generally produced in an individual naturally during any
type of infection. It represents many different clones of B cells that are making
antibodies to many different epitopes on an antigen; therefore, a heterogenous
complex mixture of antibodies is produced. Alternatively, polyclonal antiserum can
be produced by inoculating an animal such as a mouse, rabbit or goat. This is done
to produce commercial antiserum that can be purchased and utilized in laboratories.
Monoclonal antibodies are produced by one clone of B cells with specificity for the
exact same epitope on an antigen. Monoclonal antibodies are produced in the
laboratory and are used in all aspects of medicine from diagnostics to treatments
for various types of cancer and autoimmune diseases.
Polyclonal
Antiserum
Monoclonal
Antiserum
Figure FIigu9re 6. IP9olyc6l.onaPlolyclonal versvuesrsus MMoonnoocclloonnaall AntiboAdinetsibodies
9
CHAPTER 9 | IMMUNODIAGNOSTICS
Direct versus Indirect Serologic Tests
Direct serologic testing utilizes a known antiserum in order to detect an unknown
antigen, either foreign or self. Direct tests are qualitative and provide results
relatively quickly. They are used mostly for screening purposes.
?
?
+
?
Unknown Antigen Known Antiserum
FigureFigureI 9I 97.7.DDireircetct SeSreorloolgoigcic Test Test
Indirect serologic testing utilizes antibodies from the patient that may be specific
for either self or foreign antigen. This test is based on the concept that antibodies
are produced in response to a specific disease state. Indirect tests may be qualita
tive and used for screening purposes or quantitative, which provides the amount
of antibody in the patient’s serum. Quantitative tests are also called antibody titers.
A titer is often done to follow the progression of disease in a patient by looking for
an increase or decrease in the level of antibodies. A titer involves diluting the
patient’s serum out to see how dilute the serum can be and still detect antigens in a
solution.
Patient serum Known antigen Binding of antiserum to antigen
Addition of secondary reagent
Figure I 9 8. Indirect Serologic Test
Figure I 9 8. Indirect Serologic Test
9
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
1/1024
1/128 1/256 1/512
1/16 1/32 1/64 Pos. Neg
1/2 1/4 1/8
Patient Titer
1 128
2 4
3 32
4 512
5 64
6 8
7 <2
8 32
Figure I 9 9. Antibody Titers
Figure I 9 9. Antibody Titers
Most immunologic tests can be performed using direct or indirect measures.
Indirect tests are generally more specific, resulting in fewer false positives. The
Coombs, ELISA, and fluorescent antibody tests are all examples of tests that can be
utilized in either a direct or indirect manner.
AGGLUTINATION
Agglutination tests are widespread in clinical medicine and are simply a variation
on precipitation reactions. In agglutination reactions, the antigen is a particulate
antigen such as RBCs or latex beads. Both will clump up to form a lattice of
antibody bound particles in the presence of appropriate antibodies.
• Latex bead agglutination tests are available for the diagnosis of cerebrospi
nal infections such as Haemophilus, pneumococcus, meningococcus, and
Cryptococcus. In each of these cases, antibodies against these organisms
are conjugated to latex beads, and the presence of microbial antigens in
the CSF is detected by the subsequent agglutination of those beads.
• RBC agglutination reactions are important in defining ABO blood groups,
diagnosing Epstein Barr virus infection (the monospot test), and identify
ing Coombs test for Rh incompatibility.
Coombs Test
Two variations of the Coombs test exist. The direct Coombs is designed to
identify maternal anti Rh antibodies that are already bound to infant RBCs or
antibodies bound to RBCs in patients with autoimmune hemolytic anemia.
92
CHAPTER 9 | IMMUNODIAGNOSTICS
Add rabbit anti human
immunoglobulin
Baby’s RhD+ cells already coated Red cells agglutinated by
with mother’s antibody to be the addition of rabbit
used in the direct Coombs test anti immunoglobulin serum
FigureFigureI 9I 910.10. DDiriercetct CCooomombsbs Test Test
The indirect Coombs test is designed to identify Rh negative mothers who are
producing anti Rh antibodies of the IgG isotype, which may be transferred across
the placenta harming Rh positive fetuses. The indirect Coombs is also used in the
diagnosis of transfusion reactions.
Mother’s serum containing
anti RhD+ antibody to be used Rh+ RBCs
in indirect Coombs test
Serum is incubated with Rh+ RBCs
and if the serum contains anti RhD
antibodies, the antibodies will bind
human to the Rh+ RBCs
anti
immunroabgbloitbuli
Add
Red cells agglutinated by
the addition of rabbit
anti immunoglobulin serum
Figure I 9 11. Indirect Coombs Test
Figure I 9 11. Indirect Coombs Test
93
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
ABO TESTING
ABO blood typing is a uniform first step in all tissue transplantation because ABO
incompatibilities will cause hyperacute graft rejection in the host. The ABO blood
group antigens are a group of glycoprotein molecules expressed on the surface of
erythrocytes and endothelial cells. Natural isohemagglutinins (IgM antibodies that
will agglutinate the glycoprotein molecules on the red blood cells of nonidentical
individuals) are produced in response to similar molecules expressed on the
normal intestinal flora. A person is protected by self tolerance from producing
antibodies that would agglutinate his own red blood cells, but will produce those
agglutinins that will react with the red blood cells from other individuals.
Blood
A: agglutination
Types
N: no agglutination
A B O AB
Serum from: A
N A N A
Contains: Anti BAntibodies
Serum from: B
A N N A
Contains: Anti AAntibodies
Serum from: O
A A N A
Contains: Anti Aand Anti B
Antibodies
Serum from: AB
No Antibodies N N N N
Contains:
to A or B
Figure I 9 12. Agglutination Test for Blood Typing
Figure I 9 12. Agglutination Test for Blood Typing
LABELED ANTIBODY SYSTEMS
Labeled antibody systems are utilized for the detection of antigens, which may be
either self or foreign. These antigens can be visualized using a combination of
specific antibody that is labeled or tagged with a compound used for its detection.
Common tags include fluorescent compounds and enzymes.
Each of the following discussed is an example of a labeled antibody system.
Additionally, fluorescent antibody tests and ELISAs can be done using either direct
or indirect tests as described previously.
Fluorescent Antibody Tests
The direct fluorescent antibody test (DFA) is used to detect and localize antigen
in the patient. The tissue sample to be tested is treated with antibodies against that
particular antigen that have been labeled with a fluorescent dye. If the antigen is
present in the tissues, the fluorescent labeled antibodies will bind, and their
9
CHAPTER 9 | IMMUNODIAGNOSTICS
binding can be detected with a microscope. Variations of this test are used to
diagnose respiratory syncytial virus, herpes simplex 1 and 2, rabies in animal
tissues, and Pneumocystis infections.
Specific fluorescent labeled Fluorescence
Ag antibody against the Ag in + sample
+
Figure I 9 13. Direct Fluorescent Antibody (DFA) Test
Figure I 9 13. Direct Fluorescent Antibody (DFA) Test
The indirect fluorescent antibody test (IFA) is used to detect pathogen specific
antibodies in the patient. In this case, a laboratory generated sample of infected
tissue is mixed with serum from the patient. A fluorescent labeled anti
immunoglobulin is then added. If binding of antibodies from the patient to
the tissue sample occurs, then the fluorescent antibodies can be bound and
detected by microscopy. This technique can be used to detect autoantibodies
in various autoimmune diseases.
+ +
Test Ag + Ab (human immunoglobulin) + Anti human γ globulin
from patient labeled with fluorescent dye
Ifthe test Ag is fluorescent following these steps, then the
patient’s serum had antibody against this antigen.
Figure I 9Figu1r4e. IInd9irec1t4. IndirFeclutoresceFnltuorescent AntAibnotidbyody (IF(AIF)A)TestTest
9
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Enzyme linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)
The ELISA is an extremely sensitive test (as little as 10 9 g of material can be
detected). It can be used to detect the presence of hormones, drugs, antibiotics,
serum proteins, infectious disease antigens, and tumor markers. It does so by
utilizing a chromogenic substrate that undergoes an enzyme mediated color
change.
In the screening test for HIV infection, the ELISA is used with the p24 capsid
antigen coated onto microtiter plates. The serum from the patient is then added,
followed by addition of an enzyme labeled antihuman immunoglobulin. Finally,
the chromogenic substrate is added, and the production of a color change in the
well can be observed.
Serial dilution of
Positive
patient serum
p24 Ag
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 1
A
Substrate
B
C
p24 Ab D
Chromogen
E
F
G
Product
Anti human H
γ globulin
HIV microtiter plate
Enzyme Negative
portion
Figure I 9 15. ELISA Test
Figure I 9 15. ELISA Test
Recall Question
Anti human immunoglobulin is added from a rabbit to a test tube
which contains a newborn’s RhD+ RBCs covered with maternal
anti Rh antibodies; the result agglutinates the newborn’s red cells.
This is an example of which of the following?
A. ELISA test
B. Latex bead agglutination test
C. Direct Coombs test
D. Indirect Coombs test
E. Direct fluorescent antibody test
Answer: C
Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorting (FACS)
Fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) is a procedure used to rapidly analyze
cell types in a complex mixture. This is done by sorting the cells into different
populations based on their binding to specific fluorescently labeled antibodies. By
using antibodies against cell surface markers conjugated to different fluorescent
96
CHAPTER 9 | IMMUNODIAGNOSTICS
dyes, it is possible to analyze the relative numbers of cells present in a specific
tissue location.
As cells pass through the apparatus in a single file, a computer generated graph is
produced, plotting the intensity and color of fluorescence of each cell along the
axes. Each dot on the graph reflects the passage of a cell with a certain level and
color of fluorescence, so the darkly dotted areas of the graph reflect the presence of
many cells of similar attributes.
Anti CD4 Anti CD8
Anti CD20
Anti CD3
Cells with
fluorescent
antibody
Sheath fluid
Fluorescence Laser
detector beam
Light scatter
detector
– +
Deflection plates
Computer Generated Graphs
(increasing
Double stained Double stained
fluorescence) CD4 CD2
of
CD8
intensity Anti
Anti
Anti
Anti CD3 Anti CD3 Anti CD3
(increasing intensity
of fluorescence)
Figure I 9 16. Flow Cytometric Analysis
Figure I 9 16. Flow Cytometric Analysis
97

Immunizations 10
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Explain information related to vaccinations and secondary/subsequent
responses
❏ Differentiate between killed, live, and component of vaccines
❏ Differentiate between bacterial and viral vaccines
❏ Answer questions about acquisition of immunoglobulins in the fetus
and neonate
❏ Explain information related to childhood vaccine schedule
VACCINATION
Vaccination is a true milestone of medicine and has saved countless lives from
preventable diseases. The concept dates back into the 1100s when the Chinese
practiced the art of variolation. However, the practice is credited to Edward Jenner
in 1798, when he used a strain of cowpox virus to protect a child from smallpox.
This chapter will discuss the science behind vaccination as well as a summary of
the types of vaccine currently used in medicine.
SECONDARY AND SUBSEQUENT RESPONSES
When an antigen is introduced into the system a second time, the response of
lymphocytes is accelerated and the result is amplified over that of the primary
immune response. The increased speed of this response is due to the presence of
the memory cell progeny of the primary response throughout the body. The
increased amplitude of effector production is due to the fact that activation and
cloning begin from a much larger pool of respondents.
9
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Antigen X Antigen X + Antigen Y
Anti X cells
Activated cells
Anti Y cells
Secondary
Respons Activated cells anti X response
Naive cells
Naive cells
Memory cells
Immune
Activated cells
Primary
anti y response
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Weeks
Figure I 10 1. Primary and Secondary Immune Responses
Figure I 10 1. Primary and Secondary Immune Responses
Table I 10 1. Primary versus Secondary Immune Response
Feature Primary Response Secondary Response
Time lag after 5–10 days 1–3 days
immunization
Peak response Small Large
Antibody isotype IgM, then IgG Increasing IgG, IgA,
or IgE
Antibody affinity Variable to low High (affinity
maturation)
Inducing agent All immunogens Protein antigens
Immunization protocol High dose of antigen Low dose of antigen
(often with adjuvant) (often without
adjuvant)
TYPES OF IMMUNITY
Immunity to infectious organisms can be achieved by active or passive immuniza
tion. The goal of passive immunization is transient protection or alleviation of an
existing condition, whereas the goal of active immunization is the elicitation of
protective immunity and immunologic memory. Active and passive immunization
can be achieved by both natural and artificial means.
100
CHAPTER 10 | IMMUNIZATIONS
Table I 10 2. Types of Immunity
Type of Immunity Acquired Through Examples
Natural Passive means Placental IgG transport, colostrum
Natural Active means Recovery from infection
Artificial Passive means Horse antivenin against black
widow spider bite, snake bite
Horse antitoxin against botulism,
diphtheria
Pooled human immune globulin
versus hepatitis A and B, measles,
rabies, varicella zoster or tetanus
“Humanized” monoclonal antibod
ies versus RSV*
Artificial Active means Hepatitis B component vaccine
Diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis
toxoid vaccine
Haemophilus capsular vaccine
Polio live or inactivated vaccine
Measles, mumps, rubella attenu
ated vaccine
Varicella attenuated vaccine
*Monoclonal antibodies prepared in mice but spliced to the constant regions of human IgG
Passive Immunotherapy
Passive immunotherapy may be associated with several risks:
• Introduction of antibodies from other species can generate IgE antibodies,
which may cause systemic anaphylaxis. The generation of IgE after
infusion with even human gamma globulins is particularly an issue in
persons with selective IgA deficiency (1:700 in population) as IgA is a
molecule they have not encountered before. These patients can, however,
be given IgA depleted globulins.
• Introduction of antibodies from other species can generate IgG or IgM
anti isotype antibodies, which form complement activating immune
complexes, leading to possible type III hypersensitivity reactions.
• Introduction of antibodies from humans can elicit responses against
minor immunoglobulin polymorphisms or allotypes.
10
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
TYPES OF VACCINE
Live Vaccines
• Attenuated (attenuated = weak)
– Comprised of live organisms which lose capacity to cause disease but
still replicate in the host
– Best at stimulating both a humoral and cell mediated immune response,
as they mimic the natural infection and typically elicit lifelong immunity
– Typically, 1 dose provides immunity but 2 doses are used to ensure sero
conversion in most individuals
– Dangerous for immunocompromised patients because even attenuated
viruses can cause them significant disease; since attenuated vaccines are
comprised of live organisms, there is slight potential to revert back to a
virulent form
– Live viral vaccines:
o Recommended in the United States:
■ Measles, mumps and rubella (MMR)
■ Varicella zoster (VZV) (for both chicken pox and zoster [shingles])
■ Rotavirus
■ Influenza (flu mist)
o Available in the United States but recommended only under special
circumstances:
■ Polio (Sabin)
■ Smallpox
■ Yellow fever
• Non attenuated
– Used by U.S. military against adenovirus types 4 and 7
– Enteric coated, live, non attenuated virus preparation
– Produces an asymptomatic intestinal infection, thereby inducing
mucosal IgA memory cells; these cells then populate the mucosal
immune system throughout the body
– Vaccine recipients are thus protected against adenovirus acquired by
aerosol, which could otherwise produce pneumonia (this is the only
example of a live non attenuated vaccine that is used)
Killed Vaccines
• Utilize organisms that are killed so they can no longer replicate in the
host
• Inactivated by chemicals rather than heat, as heat will often denature the
immunogenic epitopes
• Typically require several doses to achieve desired response
• Predominantly produce humoral immunity
10
CHAPTER 10 | IMMUNIZATIONS
• Killed (inactivated) vaccines:
– Rabies
– Influenza
– Polio (Salk)
– Hepatitis A
Toxoid Vaccines
• Made from inactivated exotoxins from toxigenic bacteria
• Prevent disease but not infection
• Toxoid vaccines:
– Diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular pertussis (DTaP)*
*The DTaP vaccine prep is composed of toxoids from both diphtheria and tetanus,
while the pertussis comprises both filamentous hemagglutinin and inactivated
pertussis toxin. The DTaP vaccine is considered safe with few side effects, and is
the vaccine currently used in the United States.
Polysaccharide Vaccines
• Comprised of the capsular polysaccharide found in many bacteria
• Are only capable of producing IgM because of the inability of polysaccha
ride to activate Th cells (which require protein to become activated)
• Have largely been replaced with conjugate vaccines (see below)
• Polysaccharide vaccine(s):
– Streptococcus pneumoniae, pneumococcal polysaccharide (PPSV23)
o Comprised of 23 capsular serotypes of the most invasive and common
strains of S. pneumoniae
o Indicated for use in adults age >65 or special circumstances, i.e.,
splenectomy, COPD
Conjugate Vaccines
• Comprised of capsular polysaccharide conjugated to protein, usually a
toxoid (see Figure I 10 3); this creates a T cell dependent immune response
with class switching
• Creates a booster response to multiple doses
• Conjugate vaccines:
– Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib)
– Streptococcus pneumoniae, Pneumococcal conjugate (PCV13)
o Comprised of 13 capsular serotypes
o Indicated for use in infants
– Neisseria meningitidis
10
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Activated
Linear peptide T cell
“carrier epitope”
TCR
Carrier Carrier peptide
protein
MHC class II
Hapten (CHO)
B cell
Hapten specific
B cell receptor
Processing of internalized Carrier peptide binds
carrier protein to class II MHC
Figure I 10 2. Example of Conjugate Vaccine
Figure I 10 2. Example of Conjugate Vaccine
Component Vaccines
• Comprised of an immunodominant protein from the virus that is grown
in yeast cells
– For example, in the hepatitis B vaccine, the gene coding for the HBsAg is
inserted into yeast cells, which then releases this molecule into the cul
ture medium; the molecule is then purified and used as the immunogen
in the vaccine
• Component vaccines:
– HBV
o Hepatitis B surface antigen
– HPV
o Quadrivalent vaccine with serotypes 6, 11, 16 and 18
o 9 valent vaccine (Gardasil 9) to prevent >90% of cancers, as opposed
to the quadrivalent vaccine which can protect up to 70% of cancers;
contains serotypes 6, 11, 16, 18, 31, 33, 45, 52 and 58
• Released in February 2015
10
CHAPTER 10 | IMMUNIZATIONS
Recall Question
Which of the following vaccines should not be given to an
immunocompromised patient?
A. Polysaccharide
B. Conjugate
C. Toxoid
D. Live
E. Killed
Answer: D
ACQUISITION OF IMMUNOGLOBULINS IN THE FETUS AND
NEONATE
Persistence of maternal Ab affects vaccinations.
• Live attenuated virus vaccines are given only age >12 months because
residual maternal antibodies would inhibit replication and the vaccine
would fail.
• When children are at exceptionally high risk for exposure to a pathogen,
this rule is sometimes broken, but administration of vaccine at age <6–9
months is almost always associated with the need for repeated booster
inoculations.
• IgM is the only isotype useful in diagnosing infections in neonates.
• Normal infants have few infections during first few months because of
maternal IgG.
• Children with immune deficiencies don’t become ill until maternal IgG is
low.
• Infants have 20% of adult IgA at age 12 months, so colostrum is important.
Birth
lg (percent
1200
of adult level)
1000
60%
800 Total antibody
Maternal
ml 600 IgG 80%
(mg/100 400
Infant IgG
200
lg 150
IgM
100 75%
50 20%
IgA
0
0 2 4 6 8 0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Months
Figure IFig1u0re 3.I 1I0mm3u.nogIlmobmuulinnosglobulins ininSeSreurmum of FoetfusFetuasnd Naenwdborn NewbCohrinld Child
105
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
CHILDHOOD VACCINE SCHEDULE
The current recommended list of vaccines for children in the United States is listed
below. The vaccines in this list are high yield.
yr
17–18 recommendation/
2022
only only applicable
yrs dose only
dose dose
States, 16 1 1 2nd Notes areas
bars. yrs vaccinationvaccination Nonot
See
endeNmoitces)
green 13–15
United b th y e 1 y 1 rs –12 Annual Annual dose See Notes dose Notes S in ero ( p S o e s e itive basemdaking
indicated 1 1st See
vaccination
younger, yrs decision
7–10 or
as clinical
opportunity vaccination Recommended
yrs
dose dose doses dose dose
shared
or 4–6
5th 4th 2nd 2nd
2
years Annoural on
earliest yrs 1 
2–3
18 the mos
ages v at accination 19–23 doses vacgcirnoautpion
2 Notes age
S fo c r hedule c u a p tch m 1 m 8 o o s s - - - - - --  4 d - - -  t o h se - - - - - - --  v 1 o a r ccination - - s S e e r e ies, Notes Rec b i to n h e mi g s i m n ended
provide 15 -- - - - - -  do-s  eN,otes d - - ose -- - - - Annual d - - ose d - - ose dose See  can
- 4th - 2
mos d-ose or See 4th d-ose 1st 1st
Immunizationlate, -3rd - - -
start 12 -3rd  -  -3rd -  -  ages
or mos - - - - - - - - reco g m ro m up e s nded
behind 9 -- - -- - Notes Notes risk
fall 2). mos - - - - - - Notes dose Notes dose - - - - - - See See ofc h e ig rt h ain
Adolescent who (Table 6  See 3rd See 3rd  Range
those mos dose dose dose dose dose for

schedule
For 4 2nd 2nd 2nd 2nd 2nd
follow. dose dose dose dose dose
up mos - - ages
and thatcatch 2 d - ose 1st 1st 1st 1st 1st recovmacmciennadtieodn
2nd
Child notethse mo
-
see 1 - 
the up
Recommende w d ith doses, Birth dose R of an c g a e tch
between 1st for
read

pertussis pertussis mosT,T
m be usinttervals series), (Hib) (PCV13) (MMR) ≥9 MenACWY MenB
b polysaccharide
recommendations dose acellular type acellular (HPV) ( D MenACWY4C, yrs) recommended
minimum influenzae conjugate rubella papillomavi m ru o s s, (MenB 16 children
(2 poliovirus 9
T 1 able determine B (HepB) ( R R V V 1 d s ) e : o r s i e es) D tet i a p n h y u t r h s s ) e , ria, Haemophil P u n s eumoco In cc a a c y l t r i s v ) ated (IIV4) (LAIV4) mumps, (VAR) A (HepA) diph y t r h s e ) ria, Men M C ≥ i 2 Rn e g n Mo A c C oc W ca Y M B leningococPcnaelumococc ( a D l EN4CYD R o ; f an a f a g o g ll e r es
These Vaccine HepatitisRota (3 virus ( < D 7 TaP <18 Influeonrza InfluenzaMeasles, Varicella HepatitisTeta ( ≥n T 7u d s a , p Human years) FHbp) (PPSV23) Dengue 
RV5 (IPV
To ≥2
106
CHAPTER 10 | IMMUNIZATIONS
BACTERIAL VACCINES
Table I 10 3. Bacterial Vaccines
Organism Vaccine Vaccine Type
C. diphtheriae DTaP Toxoid
B. pertussis DTaP Toxoid plus filamentous hemagglutinin
C. tetani DTaP Toxoid
H. influenzae Hib Capsular polysaccharide and protein
S. pneumoniae PCV 13 capsular serotypes and protein
Pediatric
PPV 23 capsular serotypes
Adult
N. meningitidis MCV 4 4 capsular serotypes (Y, W 135, C, A)
and protein
VIRAL VACCINES
Table I 10 4. Viral Vaccines
Virus Vaccine Vaccine Type
Rotavirus RV Live
Polio IPV Killed (Salk)
OPV Live (Sabin)
Influenza IIV Inactivated (killed)
LAIV Live
Varicella zoster virus VAR Live
Hepatitis A HepA Inactivated (killed)
Human papilloma HPV Component
virus
Hepatitis B virus HepB Component
Measles MMR Live
Mumps MMR Live
Rubella MMR Live
10

1
Primary Immunodeficiencies
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Solve problems concerning defects of phagocytic cells and humoral
immunity
❏ Demonstrate understanding of deficiencies of complement or its regulation
❏ Use knowledge of defects of T lymphocytes to explain severe combined
immunodeficiencies
Immunodeficiency diseases may occur with any aspect of immunity, including NOTE
both the innate and adaptive branches. The symptoms of each disease highlight the
Another important aspect of
importance of that aspect of the immune system on protecting the host. Most of
immunodeficiency diseases is that several
these immune disorders are pediatric in nature and begin to appear usually around
age 6 months. This highlights the importance of the protective immunity afforded are Xlinked and therefore more common in
by maternal IgG, which is nearly depleted by age 6 months and completely males than females. Because these diseases
depleted by age 12 15 months. reveal the importance of the immune system‘s
basic function, they are often heavily tested.
DEFECTS OF PHAGOCYTIC CELLS
Table I 11 1. Defects of Phagocytic Cells
Disease Molecular Defect(s) Symptoms
Chronic Deficiency of NADPH oxidase (any one of Recurrent infections with catalase positive
granulomatous 4 component proteins); failure to generate bacteria and fungi
disease (CGD) superoxide anion, other O2 radicals
Leukocyte adhesion Absence of CD18—common β chain of Recurrent and chronic infections, failure to form
deficiency the leukocyte integrins pus, and delayed separation of umbilical cord
stump
The 3 integrins that contain CD18: LFA 1,
MAC 1 and gp150/95
Chediak Higashi Nonsense mutation in the lysosomal Recurrent infection with bacteria: chemotactic
syndrome trafficking regulator, CHS1/LYST protein, and degranulation defects; absent NK activity,
leads to aberrant fusion of vesicles partial albinism
Glucose 6 phosphate Deficiency of essential enzyme in hexose Same as CGD, with associated anemia
dehydrogenase monophosphate shunt
(G6PD) deficiency
Myeloperoxidase Defect in MPO affects the ability to Mild or none
deficiency convert hydrogen peroxide to hypochlorite
Hyperimmunoglobulin Defects in JAK STAT signaling pathway Characteristic facies, severe, recurrent
E syndrome (formerly leading to impaired Th17 function: sinopulmonary infections, pathologic bone
Job syndrome) decreased IFN gamma production fractures, retention of primary teeth, increased
IgE, eczematous rash
109
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
DEFECTS OF HUMORAL IMMUNITY
Table I 11 2. Defects of Humoral Immunity
Disease Molecular Defect Symptoms/Signs Treatment
Bruton (X linked) Deficiency of the Increased susceptibility Monthly gamma
agammaglobulinemia Bruton tyrosine to encapsulated bacteria globulin replacement,
kinase (btk) which and bloodborne viruses, antibiotics for infection
promotes pre B cell low immunoglobulins of
expansion; faulty all isotypes, absent or
B cell development low levels of circulating
B cells. B cell maturation
does not progress past
the pre B cell stage while
maintaining cell mediated
immunity.
X linked hyper IgM Deficiency of High serum titers of IgM Antibiotics and
syndrome CD40L on without other isotypes, gammaglobulins
activated T cells normal B and T cell
numbers, susceptibility
to encapsulated bacteria
and opportunistic
pathogens.
Selective IgA deficiency Multiple genetic Decreased IgA levels and Antibiotics, not
causes normal IgM and IgG with immunoglobulins
elevation of IgE.
Repeated sinopulmonary
and gastrointestinal
infections, ↑ atopy
Common variable Collection of Onsets in late teens, Antibiotics
Immunodeficiency syndromes; several early twenties; B cells
associated genetic present in peripheral
defects blood, immunoglobulin
levels decrease with
time; ↑ autoimmunity
Transient Delayed onset of Detected in months 5–6 Antibiotics and
hypogammaglobulinemia normal IgG of life, resolves by in severe cases,
of infancy synthesis months 16–30; gamma globulin
susceptibility to pyogenic replacement
bacteria
11
CHAPTER 11 | PRIMARY IMMUNODEFICIENCIES
DEFICIENCIES OF COMPLEMENT OR ITS REGULATION
Table I 11 3. Deficiencies of Complement or Its Regulation
Deficiencies in Complement
Components Deficiency Signs/Diagnosis
Classic pathway C1q, C1r, C1s, C4, C2 Marked increase in
immune complex
diseases, increased
infections with
pyogenic bacteria
Both pathways C3 Recurrent bacterial
infections, immune
complex disease
C5, C6, C7, C8, or C9 Recurrent
meningococcal and
gonococcal infections
Deficiencies in C1 INH (hereditary Overuse of C1, C4, or
complement regulatory angioedema) C2, edema at
proteins mucosal surfaces
DEFECTS OF T LYMPHOCYTES AND SEVERE COMBINED
IMMUNODEFICIENCIES
Although patients with defects in B lymphocytes can deal with many pathogens
adequately, defects in T lymphocytes are observed globally throughout the
immune system. Because of the central role of T cells in activation, proliferation,
differentiation, and modulation of virtually all naturally occurring immune
responses, abnormalities in these cell lines send shock waves throughout the
system. It is often a Herculean clinical effort to dissect the cause and effect
relationships in such inherited diseases, and their diagnosis is often one of
trial and error, which takes years to unravel.
Although in some cases both B and T lymphocyte defects may occur, the initial
manifestation of these diseases is almost always infection with agents such as fungi
and viruses that are normally destroyed by T cell–mediated immunity. The B cell
defect, if any, is usually not detected for the first few months of life because of the
passive transfer of immunoglobulins from the mother through the placenta or
colostrum. The immune system is so compromised that even attenuated vaccine
preparations can cause infection and disease.
11
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Table I 11 4. T Cell Deficiencies and Combined Deficiencies
Category Disease Defect Clinical Manifestations
Selective DiGeorge Heterozygous deletion of chromosome Characteristic facies and a clinical triad
T cell Syndrome 22q11; failure of formation of 3rd and of cardiac malformations, hypocalcemia
deficiency 4th pharyngeal pouches, thymic aplasia and hypoplastic thymus
MHC class I Failure of TAP 1 molecules to transport CD8+ T cells deficient, CD4+ T cells
deficiency peptides to endoplasmic reticulum normal, recurring viral infections, DTH
and Ab production normal
Combined Wiskott Aldrich Defect in the WAS protein which plays a Defective responses to bacterial
partial Syndrome critical role in actin cytoskeleton polysaccharides and depressed IgM,
B and rearrangement gradual loss of humoral and cellular
T cell responses, thrombocytopenia, and
deficiency eczema
IgA and IgE may be elevated
thrombocytopenia
eczema immunodeficiency
Ataxia Defect in the ATM kinase involved in the Ataxia (gait abnormalities), telangiectasia
telangiectasia detection of DNA damage and (capillary distortions in the eye),
progression through the cell cycle deficiency of IgA and IgE production
Complete Severe combined Defects in common γ chain of IL 2 Chronic diarrhea; skin, mouth, and
functional immunodeficiency receptor (present in receptors for IL 4, throat lesions; opportunistic (fungal)
B and (SCID) -7, -9, -15), X linked infections; low levels of circulating
T cell lymphocytes; cells unresponsive to
deficiency mitogens
Adenosine deaminase deficiency Clinical overlap with X linked SCID plus
(results in toxic metabolic products in neurologic deficiency
cells)
rag1 or rag2 gene nonsense mutations Total absence B+ T cells
Bare lymphocyte Failure of MHC class II expression, T cells present and responsive to
syndrome/MHC defects in transcription factors nonspecific mitogens, no GVHD, deficient
class II in CD4+ T cells, hypogammaglobulinemia;
deficiency clinically observed as a severe
combined immunodeficiency
Recall Question
Increased susceptibility to encapsulated bacteria and bloodborne
viruses can be seen predominantly in which of the following?
A. CGD
B. Bruton agammaglobulinemia
C. Chediak Higashi syndrome
D. Leukocyte adhesion deficiency
E. Wiskott Aldrich syndrome
F. Ataxia telangiectasia
Answer: B
11
Hypersensitivity and
12
Autoimmune Disease
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Differentiate type I (immediate), type II (antibody mediated), type III
(immune complex), and type IV (T cell mediated) hypersensitivity
❏ Answer questions about the pathogenesis of autoimmunity
Hypersensitivity diseases are conditions in which tissue damage is caused by
immune responses. They may result from uncontrolled or excessive responses
against foreign antigens or from a failure of self tolerance, in which case they are
called autoimmune diseases.
The 2 principal factors which determine the clinical and pathologic consequences
of such conditions are the type of immune response elicited and the nature and
location of the inciting antigen.
What the Hypersensitivity reactions have in common:
• The first exposure to the antigen “sensitizes” lymphocytes.
• Subsequent exposures elicit a damaging reaction.
• The response is specific to a particular antigen or a cross reacting
substance.
Hypersensitivity diseases are classified on the basis of the effector mechanism
responsible for tissue injury, and 4 types are commonly recognized.
11
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Table I 12 1. Classification of Immunologic Diseases
Type of Hypersensitivity Immune Mechanisms Mechanisms of Tissue Injury
Immediate (type I) Activation of Th2 cells resulting Immediate reaction
in the production of IgE which in
• Degranulation and release of vasoactive amines
turn binds to FcεR on mast cells,
(ie. histamine) and proteases
basophils and eosinophils
Late phase reaction
• Synthesis and secretion of prostaglandins and
leukotrienes
• Cytokine induced inflammation and leukocyte
recruitment
Antibody mediated IgM and IgG against surface (cell Complement mediated (cytotoxic)
(type II) surface or extracellular matrix)
• Opsonization and enhances phagocytosis
• Recruitment and activation of inflammatory cells
Non cytotoxic
• Change in physiologic behavior of a cell
Immune Deposition of immune complexes Complement mediated recruitment and activation of
com(tpylpeex–mediateIdII) comprised of IgM or IgG and inflammatory cells resulting in some combination of
soluble antigen arthritis, vasculitis and/or nephritis.
Delayed type Inflammatory cytokines, IFN γ and Cytokine mediated tissue damage
hypersensitivity IL 17, produced by CD4+ Th1
• IFN γ activation of macrophage
(type IV) and Th17 cells, respectively.
• IL 17 recruitment and activation of neutrophil
Direct killing
• CTL mediated cellular death
CD8+ CTLs (T cell mediated cytolysis)
Direct target cell killing, cytokine mediated
inflammation
TYPE I (IMMEDIATE) HYPERSENSITIVITY
Type I is the only type of hypersensitivity mediated by IgE antibodies and mast
cells. It is manifested within minutes of the reexposure to an antigen. The IgE
response is the normal protective response against many metazoan parasites,
which are too large to be phagocytized or killed by other cytopathic mechanisms.
Approximately 20% of all residents of the United States display this immune
response against harmless environmental antigens, e.g., pet dander, pollen; these
responses are called atopic or allergic responses.
11
CHAPTER 12 | HYPERSENSITIVITY AND AUTOIMMUNE DISEASE
1 First exposure to allergen
TH2
B
2 TH2 release of IL 4 and IL 13 stimulates
B cell to produce IgE; class switching occurs
IgE Antibody
3 B cell produces IgE immunoglobulin;
it attaches to Fc receptor on mast cell
4 Second exposure to allergen
5 Allergen cross links several IgE molecules
on mast cell and cell degranulates, releasing
powerful chemicals
Figure I 12 1. Development of the Immediate Hypersensitivity Reaction
Figure I 12 1. Development of the Immediate Hypersensitivity Reaction
11
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
The effector cells of the immediate hypersensitivity reaction are mast cells,
basophils, and eosinophils. The soluble substances they release into the site cause
the symptoms of the reaction. Approximately 2–4 hours after the immediate
response to release of these mediators, a late phase reaction is mediated by
products of the arachidonic acid cascade.
Vascular leakage
Bronchoconstriction
Biogenic amines
(e.g., histamines)
Lipid mediators
(e.g., PAF, PGD2, LTC4)
Intestinal
hypermotility
Activated mast cell Cytokines Inflammation
(or basophil) (e.g., TNF)
Lipid mediators
Tissue damage
(e.g., PAF, PGD2, LTC4)
Enzymes
(e.g., tryptase)
Killing of parasites
and host cells
Cationic granule
proteins (e.g., major
basic protein,
eosinophil cationic protein)
Tissue remodeling
Eosinophil Enzymes
(e.g., eosinophil
peroxidase)
Figure FiguIre12 I21.2 M2e.diaMtoerdsiators ooff TTyyppee IHIypHeryspeenrssietinvsiittyivity
11
CHAPTER 12 | HYPERSENSITIVITY AND AUTOIMMUNE DISEASE
Table I 12 2. Mast Cell Mediators
Mediators Stored and Released Effect
Histamine Smooth muscle contraction; increased
vascular permeability
Heparin Anticoagulant
Eosinophil chemotactic factor A Chemotactic
(multiple chemokines)
Mediators Newly Synthesized from
Arachidonic Acid Effect
Prostaglandin D2, E2, F2α Increased smooth muscle contraction
and vascular permeability
Leukotrienes C4, D4, E4 Increased smooth muscle contraction
(lipoxygenase pathway) and vascular permeability
Leukotriene B4 Chemotactic for neutrophils
Table I 12 3. Allergic Diseases Due to Specific Allergens and Their Clinical Manifestations
Allergic Disease Allergens Clinical Findings
Allergic rhinitis Trees, grasses, dust, Edema, irritation, mucus in
(hay fever) cats, dogs, mites nasal mucosa
Systemic Insect stings, drug Bronchial and tracheal
anaphylaxis reactions constriction, complete
vasodilation and death
Food allergies Milk, eggs, fish, Hives and gastrointestinal
cereals, grains problems
Wheal and flare In vivo skin testing Local skin edema,
for allergies reddening, vasodilation of
vessels
Asthma Inhaled materials Bronchial and tracheal
constriction, edema, mucus
production, massive
inflammation
Recall Question
Release of which of the following immunoglobulins can cause
urticaria, itching, and shortness of breath after a bee sting?
A. IgD
B. IgM
C. IgE
D. IgA
E. IgG
Answer: C
11
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
TYPE II (ANTIBODY MEDIATED) HYPERSENSITIVITY
Antibodies against cell surface or extracellular matrix antigens cause diseases that
are specific to the tissues where those antigens are present; they are not usually
systemic. In most cases, these antibodies are autoantibodies, but they may be
produced against a foreign antigen that is cross reactive with self components of
tissues.
These antibodies can cause tissue damage by 3 main mechanisms:
• Opsonization of cells
• Activation of the complement system which recruits neutrophils and
macrophages that cause tissue damage
• Possible binding to normal cellular receptors and interference with their
function
In some types of type II hypersensitivity, complement is activated and/or ADCC is
active (e.g., hemolytic disease of the newborn [HDNB]). In other types, cell
function is altered in the absence of complement activation and ADCC (e.g.,
myasthenia gravis and Graves disease). Eventually, as these diseases progress,
complexes of antigen and antibody may cause localized damage, but they do not
circulate so the damage is localized to the specific tissue.
11
CHAPTER 12 | HYPERSENSITIVITY AND AUTOIMMUNE DISEASE
Table I 12 4. Type II Hypersensitivities
Disease Target Antigen Mechanism of Pathogenesis Clinical Manifestations
Cytotoxic
Autoimmune RBC membrane proteins Opsonization, phagocytosis, and Hemolysis, anemia
hemolytic anemia (Rh, I Ags) complement mediated destruction
(HDNB) of RBCs
Acute rheumatic Streptococcal cell wall Ag; Ab Inflammation, macrophage Myocarditis, arthritis
fever cross reacts with myocardial Ag activation
Goodpasture Type IV collagen in basement Complement and Fc Nephritis, lung
syndrome membranes of kidney glomeruli inflammation receptor–mediated hemorrhage, linear
and lung alveoli Ab deposits
Transfusion ABO blood glycoproteins IgM isohemagglutinins formed Hemolysis
reaction naturally in response to normal
bacterial flora cause opsonization
+ complement activation
Autoimmune Platelet membrane proteins Ab mediated platelet destruction Bleedin
thrombocytopenic through opsonization and
purpura complement activation
Non cytotoxic
Myasthenia Acetylcholine receptor Ab inhibits acetylcholine binding, Muscle weakness,
gravis downmodulates receptors paralysis
Graves disease TSH receptor Ab mediated stimulation of TSH Hyperthyroidism
receptors followed by
hypothyroidism
Type II (insulin Insulin receptor Ab inhibits binding of insulin Hyperglycemia
resistant) diabetes
Pernicious anemia Intrinsic factor of gastric Neutralization of intrinsic factor, Abnormal
parietal cells decreased absorption of vitamin B12 erythropoiesis, anemia
An important example of type II hypersensitivity is HDNB, also known as
erythroblastosis fetalis. In the fetus, this disease is due to transport of IgG specific
for one of the Rhesus (Rh) protein antigens (RhD) across the placenta.
About 85% of people are Rh+. If a pregnant woman is Rh and the father is Rh+,
there is a chance that the fetus will also be Rh+. This situation will pose no
problem in the first pregnancy, as the mother’s immune system will not usually
encounter fetal blood cell antigens until placental separation at the time of birth.
At that time, however, Rh+ fetal red blood cells will enter the maternal circulation
and stimulate a T dependent immune response, eventually resulting in the
generation of memory B cells capable of producing IgG antibody against RhD.
In a subsequent pregnancy with another Rh+ fetus, this maternal IgG can be
transported across the placenta, react with fetal Rh+ red cells, and activate
complement, producing hemolytic disease. Hemolytic disease of the newborn can
be prevented by treating the Rh mother with RhoGAMTM, a preparation of
human anti RhD antibody, at 28 weeks of gestation and again within 72 hours
after birth. This antibody effectively eliminates the fetal Rh+ cells before they can
generate RhD specific memory B cells in the mother. Anti RhD antibody should
be given to any Rh individual following any termination of pregnancy.
119
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
TYPE III (IMMUNE COMPLEX) HYPERSENSITIVITY
The immune complexes that cause disease may involve either self or foreign
antigens bound to antibodies. These immune complexes are filtered out of the
circulation in the small vasculature, so their sites of ultimate damage do not reflect
their sites of origin. These diseases tend to be systemic, with little tissue or organ
specificity.
Table I 12 5. Type III Hypersensitivities
Disease Antigen Involved Clinical Manifestations
Systemic lupus dsDNA, Sm, other Nephritis, arthritis,
erythematosus+ nucleoproteins vasculitis, butterfly
facial rash
Poststreptococcal Streptococcal cell wall Nephritis, “lumpy
glomerulonephritis Ags (may be “planted” in bumpy” deposits
glomerular basement
membrane)
Arthus reaction Any injected protein Local pain and edema
Serum sickness Various proteins Arthritis, vasculitis,
nephritis
Polyarteritis nodosa Hepatitis B virus Ag Systemic vasculitis
+Other autoimmune diseases correlated with production of antinuclear antibodies include
diffuse systemic sclerosis (antibodies to DNA topoisomerase 1), limited scleroderma
(CREST; antibodies to centromeric proteins) and Sjögren syndrome (antibodies to
ribonucleoproteins).
TYPE IV (T CELL–MEDIATED) HYPERSENSITIVITY
T lymphocytes may cause tissue injury by triggering delayed type hypersensitivity
(DTH) reactions or by directly killing target cells. These reactions are elicited by
CD4+ Th1, Th17 cells, or CD8+ CTLs, which activate macrophages, recruit
neutrophils, and induce inflammation. These T cells may be autoreactive or
specific against foreign protein antigens bound to tissues. T cell mediated tissue
injury is common during the protective immune response against persistent
intracellular microbes.
12
CHAPTER 12 | HYPERSENSITIVITY AND AUTOIMMUNE DISEASE
Table I 12 6. Type IV Hypersensitivities
Disease Specificity of Pathogenic T Cells Clinical Manifestations
Tuberculin test PPD (tuberculin & mycolic acid) Indurated skin lesion (granuloma)
Contact dermatitis Nickel, poison ivy/oak Vesicular skin lesions, pruritus, rash
catechols, hapten/carrier
Hashimoto thyroiditis* Unknown Ag in thyroid Hypothyroidism
Multiple sclerosis Myelin Basic Protein Progressive demyelination, blurred vision,
paralysis
Rheumatoid arthritis* Unknown Ag in joint synovium Rheumatoid factor (IgM against Fc region of IgG),
(type II collagen?) alpha cyclic citrullinated peptide (α CCP)
antibodies, chronic arthritis, inflammation,
destruction of articular cartilage and bone
Insulin dependent Islet cell antigens, insulin, Chronic inflammation and destruction of β cells,
Diabetes mellitus glutamic acid decarboxylase, polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia, ketoacidosis
(type I)* others
Guillain Barré Peripheral nerve myelin or Ascending paralysis, peripheral nerve
syndrome* gangliosides demyelination
Celiac disease CD4+ cells—gliadin, CD8+ Gluten sensitive enteropathy
cells—HLA class I like molecule
expressed during stress
Crohn disease Unknown Ag, commensal Chronic intestinal inflammation due to Th1 and
bacteria? Th17 cells, obstruction
*Diseases classified at type IV pathologies in which autoantibodies are present and used as clinical markers
THE PATHOGENESIS OF AUTOIMMUNITY
The key factor in the development of autoimmunity is the recognition of self anti
gens by autoreactive lymphocytes, which then become activated, proliferate, and
differentiate to produce effector cells and cytokines that cause tissue injury.
Autoimmunity must initially result from a failure of mechanisms of central
tolerance, as cells are “educated” in the bone marrow and thymus (see chapter 3).
Self reactive lymphocytes that escaped central tolerance are subject to the different
mechanisms of peripheral tolerance. The 3 primary mechanisms that induce
peripheral tolerance are anergy, deletion and suppression.
B lymphocytes that recognize self antigen in the absence of the T cell signaling
become anergic and express high levels of IgD on their surface, excluding them
from secondary lymphoid tissues. Anergic B lymphocytes are then unable to
receive the signals necessary for survival and undergo apoptosis. Additionally,
B lymphocytes have inhibitory receptors that can be engaged when self antigen is
recognized suppressing their activity.
12
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Similar to self reactive B lymphocytes, T lymphocytes that recognize self antigen
in the absence of the appropriate costimulatory signals are subject to anergy or
deletion. Anergy is the result of a breakdown in either TCR signaling or the
binding of an inhibitory receptor, CTLA 4 or PD 1. Deletion of self reactive T
lymphocytes is due to apoptosis by activation of the caspase signaling pathway or
the Fas signaling pathway.
Self reactive T lymphocytes are also subject to suppression by Tregs. Although a
majority of Tregs are generated during central tolerance, some arise in the periph
ery. Tregs secrete IL 10 and TGF beta that inhibit the activation of lymphocytes,
macrophage and dendritic cells. CTLA 4 is expressed at high levels on Tregs and is
thought to bind to and sequester the costimulatory molecule B7 which would
otherwise be used to activate T lymphocytes.
Development of autoimmune disease is due to a combination of genetic and
environmental factors as well as hormonal triggers. Among the strongest genetic
associations with the development of autoimmune disease are the HLA genes.
Also known to contribute to autoimmunity are polymorphisms in non HLA
genes.
Table I 12 7. Examples of HLA Linked Immunologic Diseases
Disease HLA Allele
Rheumatoid arthritis DR4
Insulin dependent diabetes mellitus DR3/DR4
Multiple sclerosis, Goodpasture DR2
Systemic lupus erythematosus DR2/DR3
Ankylosing spondylitis, psoriasis, inflammatory bowel B27
disease, reactive arthritis
Celiac disease DQ2 or DQ8
Graves disease B8
Infections and tissue injury may alter the way that self antigens are presented to
lymphocytes and serve as an inciting factor in the development of disease. Because
autoimmune reactions against one self antigen may injure other tissues and expose
other potential self antigens for recognition, autoimmune diseases tend to be
chronic and progressive.
Recall Question
What type of hypersensitivity is involved in Hashimoto thyroiditis?
A. Type IV
B. Type II cytotoxic
C. Type II non cytotoxic
D. Type III
E. Type I
Answer: A
12
Transplantation 13
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Solve problems concerning definitions
❏ Use knowledge of mechanisms of graft rejection
❏ Answer questions about graft versus host disease
OVERVIEW
Transplantation is the process of taking cells, tissues, or organs (a graft) from one
individual (the donor) and implanting them into another individual or another
site in the same individual (the host or recipient). Transfusion is a special case of
transplantation and the most frequently practiced today, in which circulating
blood cells or plasma are infused from one individual into another. As we have
seen in previous chapters, the immune system is elaborately evolved to recognize
minor differences in self antigens that reflect the invasion of harmful microbes or
pathologic processes, such as cancer. Unfortunately, it is this same powerful
mechanism of self protection which thwarts tissue transplantation because tissues
derived from other individuals are recognized as “altered self” by the educated
cells of the host’s immune system.
Types of Graft Tissue
Several types of grafts are used in medicine:
• Autologous grafts (or autografts) are those where tissue is moved from
one location to another in the same individual (skin grafting in burns or
coronary artery replacement with saphenous veins).
• Isografts (or syngeneic grafts) are those transplanted between genetically
identical individuals (monozygotic twins).
• Allogeneic grafts are those transplanted between genetically different
members of the same species (kidney transplant).
• Xenogeneic grafts are those transplanted between members of different
species (pig heart valves into human).
12
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
MECHANISMS OF GRAFT REJECTION
The recognition of transplanted cells as self or foreign is determined by the
extremely polymorphic genes of the major histocompatibility complex, which are
expressed in a codominant fashion. This means that each individual inherits a
complete set or haplotype from each parent and virtually assures that 2 genetically
unrelated individuals will have distinctive differences in the antigens expressed on
their cells. The net result is that all grafts except autografts are ultimately identified
as foreign invading proteins and destroyed by the process of graft rejection. Even
syngeneic grafts between identical twins can express recognizable antigenic
differences due to somatic mutations that occur during the development of the
individual. For this reason, all grafts except autografts must be followed by some
degree of lifelong immunosuppression of the host to attempt to avoid rejection
reactions.
The time sequence of allograft rejection differs depending on the tissue involved
but always displays specificity and memory. As the graft becomes vascularized,
CD4+ and CD8+ cells that migrate into the graft from the host become sensitized
and proliferate in response to both major and minor histocompatibility differ
ences. In the effector phase of the rejection, Th cytokines play a critical role in
stimulating macrophage, cytotoxic T cell, and even antibody mediated killing.
Interferons and TNF α and -β all increase the expression of class I MHC mol
ecules in the graft, and IFN γ increases the expression of class II MHC as well,
increasing the susceptibility of cells in the graft to MHC restricted killing.
NOTE Allograft rejection phenomena are classified according to their time of activation
and the type of effector mechanism that predominates.
MHC alleles are expressed codominantly.
Hyperacute Graft Rejection
• Occurs within minutes to hours
• Due to pre formed antibodies due to transfusions, multi parity, or
previous organ transplants (type II cytotoxic hypersensitivity)
• Antibodies bind to the grafted tissue and activate complement and the
clotting cascade resulting in thrombosis and ischemic necrosis
• Rare because of cross matching blood, but common vignette
Acute Graft Rejection
• Occurs within days to weeks; the timing and mechanism are similar to a
primary immune response
• Induced by alloantigens (predominantly MHC) in the graft
• Both CD4 and CD8 T cells play a role as well as antibodies (think normal
immune response)
• Immunosuppressive therapy works to prevent this type of graft rejection
mainly
Accelerated Acute Graft Rejection
• Occurs within days; the timing and mechanism are similar to a memory
response.
12
CHAPTER 13 | TRANSPLANTATION
Chronic Graft Rejection
• Occurs within months to years
• Predominantly T cell mediated
• Difficult to treat and usually results in graft rejection
• Etiology not well understood, possibly triggered by viral infections
Table I 13 1. Type and Tempo of Rejection Reactions
Type of Rejection Time Taken Mechanism & Pathogenesis
Hyperacute Minutes to
Endothelial Blood
rejection hours
cell vessel
Complement
activation,
endothelial
damage,
inflammation
and thrombosis
Alloantigen Circulating alloantigen
(e.g., blood specific antibody
group antigen) (pre formed
Acute rejection Days to
weeks
Parenchymal
cell damage,
interstitial
Parenchymal cells inflammation
Alloreactive
antibody
Endothelialitis
Endothelial
cell
Accelerated Days As above, but mediated by memory cell responses
acute rejection
Chronic Months to
rejection years Macrophage
Causes unclear:
chronic DTH
reaction in
vessel wall,
intimal smooth
muscle cell
proliferation,
vessel occlusion
Cytokines
Vascular
smooth Alloantigen
Cytokines
muscle cell specific CD4+ T cell
125
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
GRAFT VERSUS HOST DISEASE
A special case of tissue transplantation occurs when the grafted tissue is bone
marrow. Because the bone marrow is the source of pluripotent hematopoietic stem
cells, it can be used to reconstitute myeloid, erythroid, and lymphoid cells in a
recipient who has lost these cells as a result of malignancy or chemotherapeutic
regimens. Because the bone marrow is a source of some mature T lymphocytes, it
is necessary to remove these cells before transplantation to avoid the appearance of
graft versus host disease in the recipient. In this special case of rejection, any
mature T cells remaining in the bone marrow inoculum can attack allogeneic
MHC bearing cells of the recipient and cause widespread epithelial cell death
accompanied by rash, jaundice, diarrhea, and gastrointestinal hemorrhage.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Monoclonal antibodies are used in the treatment and prevention of graft
rejection along with the classic therapies (corticosteroids, cyclosporine A,
rapamycin, etc.). Several monoclonals currently in use for graft rejection are
listed below.
Drug/Target Mechanism of Action
Daclizumab, basiliximab (anti Blocks T cell proliferation via
IL 2 receptor antibody) blocking the binding of IL 2,
opsonization of IL 2R bearing
cells
Muromonab (anti CD3) Blocks T cell activation by
causing apoptosis
Belatacept (CTLA 4 Ig) Inhibits T cell activation by
blocking the B7 costimulatory
molecule binding to CD28
Alemtuzumab (anti CD52)* Depletes pool of T cells by
binding to them and causing
complement mediated lysis
*CD52 is a marker found on all lymphocytes.
Recall Question
What type of graft rejection occurs within minutes to hours?
A. Chronic
B. Acute
C. Accelerated acute
D. Hyperacute
E. Graft versus host
Answer: D
12
Appendix
I
CD Markers
CD Designation Cellular Expression Known Functions
CD2 (LFA 2) T cells, thymocytes, NK cells Adhesion molecule
CD3 T cells, thymocytes Signal transduction by the TCR
CD4 Th cells, thymocytes, monocytes, and Coreceptor for TCR MHC II interaction,
macrophages receptor for HIV
CD8 CTLs, some thymocytes Coreceptor for MHC class I–restricted T
cells
CD14 (LPS receptor) Monocytes, macrophages, granulocytes Binds LPS
CD16 (Fc receptor) NK cells, macrophages, neutrophils Opsonization ADCC
CD18 Leukocytes Cell adhesion molecule (missing in
leukocyte adhesion deficiency)
CD19 B cells Coreceptor with CD21 for B cell activation
(signal transduction)
CD20 Most or all B cells Unknown role in B cell activation
CD21 (CR2, C3d Mature B cells Receptor for complement fragment C3d,
receptor) forms coreceptor complex with CD19,
Epstein Barr virus receptor
CD25 Activated Th cells and TReg Alpha chain of IL 2 receptor
CD28 T cells T cell receptor for costimulatory molecule
B7
CD34 Precursors of hematopoietic cells, endo Cell–cell adhesion, binds L selectin
thelial cells in HEV
CD40 B cells, macrophages, dendritic cells, Binds CD40L, role in T cell–dependent B cell,
endothelial cells macrophage, dendritic cell and endothelial
cell activation
CD56 NK cells Cell adhesion
CD152 (CTLA 4) Activated T cells Negative regulation: competes with CD28
for B7 binding
12

Appendix
II
Cytokines
Cytokine Secreted by Target Cell/Tissue Activity
Interleukin (IL) 1 Monocytes, macro Th cells Costimulates activation
phages, B cells, dendritic
cells, endothelial cells,
others
B cells Promotes maturation and
clonal expansion
NK cells Enhances activity
Endothelial cells Increases expression of
ICAMs
Macrophages and Chemotactically attracts
neutrophils
Hepatocytes Induces synthesis of
acute phase proteins
Hypothalamus Induces fever
IL 2 Th cells Antigen primed Th and Induces proliferation,
CTLs enhances activity
IL 3 Th cells, NK cells Hematopoietic cells Supports growth and
(myeloid) differentiation
IL 4 Th2 cells Antigen primed B cells Costimulates activation
Activated B cells Stimulates proliferation and
differentiation, induces
class switch to IgE
IL 5 Th2 cells and mast cells Bone marrow cells Induces eosinophil differen
tiation
IL 6 Monocytes, macro Proliferating B cells Promotes terminal differen
phages, Th2 cells, bone tiation into plasma cells
marrow stromal cells
Plasma cells Stimulates Ab secretion
Myeloid stem cells Helps promote differentiation
Hepatocytes Induces synthesis of
acute phase proteins
IL 7 Bone marrow, thymic Lymphoid stem cells Induces differentiation into
stromal cells progenitor B and T cells
(Continued )
12
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Cytokine Secreted by Target Cell/Tissue Activity
IL 8 Macrophages, endothelial Neutrophils Chemokine, induces
cells adherence to endothelium
and extravasation into
tissues
IL 10 Th2 cells Macrophages Suppresses cytokine
production by Th1 cells
TReg cells
IL 11 Bone marrow stroma Bone marrow ↑ platelet count
IL 12 Macrophages, B cells Activated CD8+ cells Acts synergistically with IL 2
to induce differentiation
into CTLs
NK and LAK cells and Stimulates proliferation
activated Th1 cells
IL 13 Th2 cell B cells Induces isotype switch to
IgE
IL 17 Th17 cells Fibroblasts, endothelial Increases inflammation.
cells, macrophages Attracts PMNs, induces
IL 6, IL 1, TGFβ, TNFα, IL 8
IL 18 Macrophages IFN γ synthesis NK cells, Th cells, IFN γ
synthesis
Interferon α (type I) Leukocytes Uninfected cells Inhibits viral replication
IL 22 Th17 Endothelium Stabilizes endothelial
barrier, induces secretion of
microbials
Interferon β (type I) Fibroblasts Uninfected cells Inhibits viral replication
Interferon γ (type II) Th1, CTLs, NK cells Macrophages Enhances activity
Many cell types Increases expression of
classes I and II MHC
Proliferating B cells Induces class switch to
IgG2a, blocks IL 4–induced
class switch to IgE and
IgG1
Th2 cells Inhibits proliferation
Phagocytic cells Mediates effects important
in DTH, treatment for CGD
Transforming growth Platelets, macrophages, Proliferating B cells Induces class switch to IgA
factor β lymphocytes, mast cells
Tumor necrosis factor α Macrophages, NK cells Tumor cells Has cytotoxic effect
Inflammatory cells Induces cytokine secretion,
causes cachexia of chronic
inflammation
(Continued )
13
APPENDIX II | CYTOKINES
Cytokine Secreted by Target Cell/Tissue Activity
Tumor necrosis factor β Th1 and CTL Tumor cells Has cytotoxic and other
effects, like TNF α
Macrophages and Enhances phagocytic
neutrophils activity
Granulocyte colony Macrophages and Th Bone marrow granulocyte Induce proliferation, used
stimulating factor cells precursors clinically to counteract
(G CSF) neutropenia following
ablative chemotherapy
Granulocyte–macrophage Macrophages and Th Bone marrow granulocyte Induces proliferation; used
colony stimulating cells and macrophage clinically to counteract
factor (GM CSF) precursors neutropenia following
ablative chemotherapy
CYTOKINES AVAILABLE IN RECOMBINANT FORM
Cytokine Clinical Uses
Aldesleukin (IL 2) ↑ lymphocyte differentiation and ↑ NKs—used in renal cell cancer and metastatic
melanoma
Interleukin 11 ↑ platelet formation—used in thrombocytopenia
Filgrastim (G CSF) ↑ granulocytes—used for marrow recovery
Sargramostim (GM CSF) ↑ granulocytes and macrophages—used for marrow recovery
Erythropoietin Anemias, especially associated with renal failure
Thrombopoietin Thrombocytopenia
Interferon α Hepatitis B and C, leukemias, melanoma
Interferon β Multiple sclerosis
Interferon γ Chronic granulomatous disease →↑ TNF
13

Immunology Practice Questions
CELLS OF THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
1. Isotype switching during B cell ontogeny dedicates mature B cells to
production of a single heavy chain isotype, except in the case of IgM and
IgD, which can be expressed concomitantly. How is this expression of both
isotypes simultaneously possible?
A. Allelic exclusion
B. Allelic codominance
C. Affinity maturation
D. Alternative RNA splicing
E. Somatic hypermutation
2. A 4 year old boy is brought to his pediatrician with complaints of abnormal
bruising and repeated bacterial infections. A blood workup reveals throm
bocytopenia and neutropenia and the presence of numerous small, dense
lymphoblasts with scant cytoplasm. Immunophenotyping of the abnormal
cells determines them to be extremely primitive B cells, which are CD19+,
HLA DR+, and Tdt+. Which of the following best describes the status of
immunoglobulin chain synthesis most likely in these cells?
A. IgM monomers inserted in the membrane
B. IgM monomers present in the cytoplasm
C. Mu (μ) chains inserted in the membrane
D. Mu (μ) chains present in the cytoplasm
E. No immunoglobulin chain synthesis present
3. A young woman with acute myeloblastic leukemia is treated with intensive
chemotherapy and achieves remission of her symptoms. Because the prog
nosis for relapse is relatively high, a bone marrow transplant is undertaken
in her first remission. Which of the following cytokines administered with
the bone marrow cells would have the beneficial result of stimulating
lymphoid cell development from the grafted stem cells?
A. IL 1
B. IL 2
C. IL 3
D. IL 6
E. IL 7
13
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
4. A 2 year old boy is evaluated for a severe combined immunodeficiency
disease. His bone marrow has normal cellularity. Radioactive tracer studies
demonstrate a normal number of T cell precursors entering the thymus,
but no mature T lymphocytes are found in the blood or peripheral organs.
Cells populating the thymus are found to lack CD3. Which of the following
capabilities would his cells lack?
A. Ability to bind cell bound peptides
B. Ability to express CD4/CD8 coreceptors
C. Ability to produce terminal deoxyribonucleotidyl transferase
D. Ability to proliferate in response to specific antigen
E. Ability to rearrange T cell receptor gene segments
THE SELECTION OF LYMPHOCYTES
5. The blood from an 8 year old boy was analyzed by flow cytometry. The
cells were treated with fluorescent labeled antibodies to various cell surface
markers before they were evaluated by flow cytometry. Which of the
following markers would identify the B lymphocytes in the sample?
A. CD3
B. CD4
C. CD8
D. CD19
E. CD56
6. An 18 year old soccer player is seen by a physician because of chest
tightness and dyspnea on exertion. A 15 cm mediastinal mass is detected
radiographically. Eighty percent of the white blood cells in the peripheral
blood are small, abnormal lymphocytes with lobulated nuclei and scant
cytoplasm. Immunophenotyping of the abnormal cells shows them to be
CD4+ and CD8+. Where would such cells normally be found in the body?
A. Bone marrow
B. Peripheral blood
C. Thymic cortex
D. Thymic medulla
E. Splenic periarteriolar lymphoid sheaths
LYMPHOCYTE RECIRCULATION AND HOMING
7. A 65 year old woman was involved in an automobile accident that necessi
tated the removal of her spleen. To which of the following pathogens would
she have the most increased susceptibility?
A. Babesia microti
B. Bordetella pertussis
C. Corynebacterium diphtheriae
D. Enteroaggregative Escherichia coli
E. Human papilloma virus
13
IMMUNOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
8. A 6 year old child is taken to his pediatrician because the parents are
alarmed about an indurated fluctuant mass on the posterior aspect of his
neck. The mass is nontender and shows no signs of inflammation. The
child is examined carefully, and no other masses are found. The pediatri
cian decides to submit a biopsy of this area to a pathologist. The pathologist
reports back that the mass is a lymph node with markedly increased num
bers of cells in the cortical area. Fluorescent antisera to which of the cell
surface markers is most likely to bind to cells in this area?
A. CD2
B. CD3
C. CD4
D. CD16
E. CD19
9. A radioactive tracer dye is injected subcutaneously into the forearm of an
experimental subject. What is the first area of the first draining lymph node
that would develop significant radioactivity?
A. Cortex
B. Medulla
C. Paracortex
D. Primary follicle
E. Subcapsular sinus
THE FIRST RESPONSE TO ANTIGEN
10. A rabbit hunter in Arkansas is diagnosed with ulceroglandular tularemia
and treated with streptomycin. Within a week, he returns to the hospital.
The tularemic papule, lymphadenopathy, and bacteremia have resolved, but
he has now developed a raised, itching skin rash and a fever. The drug was
discontinued, and the symptoms subsided. What was the role of streptomy
cin in this case?
A. It acted as a B cell mitogen
B. It acted as a hapten
C. It acted as a provider of costimulatory signals
D. It acted as a superantigen
E. It acted as an immunogen
11. A 2 year old child who has suffered recurrent bacterial infections is
evaluated for immunologic deficiency. The child has age normal numbers
of CD19+ and CD3+ cells in the peripheral blood and an extreme
neutrophilia. The nitroblue tetrazolium dye reduction test is normal.
What is the most likely defect in this child?
A. Absence of CCR4
B. Absence of CD18
C. Absence of interleukin 1
D. Absence of interleukin 4
E. Absence of tumor necrosis factor α
13
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
12. A 2 year old boy is admitted to the hospital for workup of a possible immu
nologic disorder. His history is remarkable for the occurrence of multiple
skin infections involving Staphylococcus, Pseudomonas, and Candida. On
examination the child has cervical lymphadenopathy and mild hepato
splenomegaly. Blood tests reveal an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate
and neutrophilia. The nitroblue tetrazolium dye reduction test and neutro
phil oxidative index are negative. What is the most likely defect in this
child?
A. C3 deficiency
B. Deficiency of CD18
C. Deficiency of myeloperoxidase
D. NADPH oxidase deficiency
E. Phagocyte granule structural defect
THE PROCESSING AND PRESENTATION OF ANTIGEN
13. Human infections with Mycobacterium leprae express a spectrum of clinical
presentations depending on the extent and expression of their immune
response to the intracellular organism. On one end of the spectrum,
patients with tuberculoid leprosy produce an effective cell mediated
immune response, which is successful at killing the intracellular organisms
and, unfortunately, produces tissue damage. Patients with tuberculoid
leprosy have granulomas that have elevated amounts of IL 2, IFN γ, and
TNF β. Which of the following immune cells is responsible for this pattern
of cytokine production?
A. Cytotoxic T lymphocyte
B. Epithelioid cell
C. Macrophage
D. Th1 cell
E. Th2 cell
14. There is evidence that the immunologic pathway that distinguishes the
selection between the two polar forms of leprosy depends on the initial
means of antigen presentation, as well as individual human differences in
response. If early events of antigen recognition elicit production of IL 4,
IL 5, IL 6, and IL 10, lepromatous leprosy is more likely to result, with the
outcome of failure to mount a protective delayed type hypersensitivity
response. What differential characteristic of the lepromatous form is pre
dicted based on the fact of overproduction of IL 4, IL 5, IL 6, IL 10, IL 13
and TGFβ in lepromatous lesions?
A. Autoimmunity
B. Granuloma formation
C. Hypergammaglobulinemia
D. Immediate hypersensitivity
E. Inflammation
13
IMMUNOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
15. An elderly man with diabetes develops a blister on the heel of his foot,
which becomes infected. Although nursing staff in the home where he is a
resident clean and treat the wound with topical antibiotic ointment, he
develops a fever and hypotension, and a desquamating rash spreads from
the site of the original blister. How does the toxin responsible for his symp
toms cause these signs?
A. It acts as an IL 1 homologue
B. It activates B lymphocytes polyclonally
C. It activates complement
D. It cross links MHC class II molecules to TCRs polyclonally
E. It stimulates neutrophils
16. It has been learned in several experimental systems that proliferation and
differentiation of T lymphocytes in response to tumor cells is low because
tumor cells lack the necessary costimulatory molecules for lymphocyte
activation. If melanoma cells from a patient were induced to express these
costimulatory molecules by transfection, production of an effective antitu
mor response might occur. Which of the following molecules would be the
best candidate for transfection of tumor cells to achieve this end?
A. B7
B. CD2
C. CD4
D. CD28
E. LFA 1
17. A 50 year old woman with severe rheumatoid arthritis is started on inflix
imab (anti tumor necrosis factor alpha). This therapy has been shown to
increase the production of CD25 positive T cells. Which of the following is
likely, therefore, to become elevated in this patient?
A. Interferon gamma
B. Interleukin 1
C. Interleukin 2
D. Interleukin 10
E. Transforming growth factor beta
THE GENERATION OF HUMORAL EFFECTOR MECHANISMS
18. IgM isohemagglutinins from an individual of blood group A are treated
with pepsin. When the product of this reaction is added to group B eryth
rocytes, they will be
A. agglutinated
B. lysed
C. phagocytized
D. precipitated
E. unaffected
13
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
19. A 26 year old obstetric patient becomes ill during the first trimester of pregnancy
with fever and lymphadenopathy. She is found to have a rising titer of anti
Toxoplasma gondii antibodies. She delivers a full term baby with no apparent
signs of in utero infection. The best test to diagnose acute infection in the neo
nate would be a parasite specific ELISA for which isotype of immunoglobulin?
A. IgA
B. IgD
C. IgE
D. IgG
E. IgM
20. A 4 year old boy is evaluated for a possible immunologic deficiency. He has
suffered repeated infections of mucosal surface pathogens and has shown
delayed development of protective responses to the standard childhood vacci
nations. Immunoelectrophoresis of his serum demonstrates absence of a mac
roglobulin peak, and his sputum is devoid of secretory IgA. Normal numbers
of B lymphocytes bearing monomeric IgM are found by flow cytometry, and
serum levels of monomeric IgA, IgE, and each of the 4 subisotypes of IgG are
normal. Which of the following deficiencies could account for these findings?
A. Absence of CD40
B. Absence of J chains
C. Absence of IL 4
D. Absence of Tdt
E. Absence of Th2 cells
21. A 56 year old man who lives in a homeless shelter is brought to the emer
gency department after he was coughing all night. He has a history of
alcoholism. On arrival he is febrile, his pulse is rapid, and his breathing is
labored with diffuse rales. Endotracheal aspirates produce a mucopurulent
discharge containing numerous gram positive cocci in chains. His serum
contains high titers of IgM antibodies specific for the polysaccharide
capsule of Streptococcus pneumoniae. The effector mechanism most likely
to act in concert with this early IgM production to clear infection is
A. ADCC
B. complement mediated opsonization
C. cytotoxic T lymphocytes
D. LAK cells
E. NK cells
22. Up until the 1970s, tonsillectomies were routinely performed on children
with swollen tonsils. This procedure has lost its widespread appeal as we
have learned the important role of mucosal associated lymphoid tissue
(MALT) in the protective immune response. What is the major immuno
globulin produced by the MALT?
A. A dimeric immunoglobulin with secretory component
B. A monomeric immunoglobulin that crosses the placenta
C. A monomeric immunoglobulin bound by mast cells
D. A monomeric immunoglobulin that opsonizes
E. A pentameric immunoglobulin that activates complement
13
IMMUNOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
THE GENERATION OF CELL MEDIATED EFFECTOR MECHANISMS
23. A 62 year old accountant develops a solid tumor that is unresponsive to
chemotherapy. He elects to participate in an experimental treatment proto
col to stimulate his own immune effector cells to recognize and kill the
malignant cells. The tumor cells are found to have no expression of MHC
class I antigens. Which of the following in vitro treatments of his tumor
cells is likely to stimulate the most effective immune response when rein
fused into the patient?
A. IFN γ
B. IL 2
C. IL 8
D. IL 10
E. TNF β
24. Before 1960, children with enlarged thymus glands were frequently irradiat
ed to functionally ablate this organ, whose role was not yet known. Over
the lifetime of such individuals, which of the following conditions was likely
to develop?
A. Depressed immune surveillance of tumors
B. Depressed oxygen dependent killing by neutrophils
C. Depressed primary response to soluble antigens
D. Increased cellularity of lymph node paracortical areas
E. Increased tendency toward atopy
25. A 42 year old man who is visiting the United States from overseas comes
into the hospital clinic. He complains of several months of weight loss,
night sweats, mild sputum production, and the spitting up of blood. You
run a PPD skin test and the results are positive. What can you conclude
from this result?
A. A cell mediated immune response has occurred
B. A humoral immune response has occurred
C. The B cell system is functional
D. The B and T cell systems are functional
E. The neutrophilic phagocyte system is functional
THE GENERATION OF IMMUNOLOGIC MEMORY
26. In a lifetime, a person may receive a dozen or more tetanus toxoid inocula
tions. When boosters are administered at 10 year intervals, which of the
following would be true of the B lymphocytes that respond?
A. Their receptors would have high avidity
B. They would be large and highly metabolic
C. They would have low levels of adhesion molecules
D. They would have surface IgG, IgA, or IgE
E. They would have surface IgM
13
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
VACCINATION AND IMMUNOTHERAPY
27. All residents of a Chicago nursing home are inoculated intramuscularly
with an H3N2 influenza A preparation. The goal of this protocol is to stim
ulate which of the following types of immunity?
A. Adaptive
B. Artificial active
C. Artificial passive
D. Natural active
E. Natural passive
28. A 28 year old man was brought into court for nonpayment of child support.
A 20 year old woman insists that he is the father of her child. The court
suggests before hearing the paternity case that various genetic tests be
performed on the man, woman, and child. One of the sets of tests was for
genetic immunoglobulin identification. Which immunoglobulin marker
would be useful in this case?
A. Allotype
B. Idiotype
C. IgA2
D. IgM
E. Isotype
IMMUNODEFICIENCY DISEASES
29. A newborn is evaluated for immunologic function. He has a distortion of
the shape of his mouth, low set and malformed ears, and widely spaced
eyes. Radiographically, there is evidence of cardiac malformation and
absence of a thymic shadow. Which of the following parameters would be
normal in this child?
A. Antibody dependent cell mediated cytotoxicity of parasite targets
B. Cellularity of splenic periarteriolar lymphoid sheaths
C. Cytotoxic killing of virus infected targets
D. Generation of oxygen metabolites in phagocytic cells
E. Proliferative response to concanavalin A
30. A 14 month old is referred to a specialist for diagnosis of a potential
immunologic deficiency. For the past 4 months, the child has suffered
repeated episodes of bacterial infections and attempts to induce immunity
using the pneumococcal vaccine have failed. Studies of peripheral blood
indicate an absence of cells responsive to pokeweed mitogen. Bone marrow
aspirates are remarkable for hypercellularity of pre B cells. What is the most
likely diagnosis?
A. Bruton agammaglobulinemia
B. Common variable hypogammaglobulinemia
C. DiGeorge syndrome
D. Selective immunoglobulin deficiency
E. Wiskott Aldrich syndrome
14
IMMUNOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
31. A patient has been hospitalized 3 times for painful abdominal edema and is
complaining now of swollen lips. What will laboratory findings in this
patient most likely include?
A. Abnormal superoxide anion production by neutrophils
B. Abnormal T cell function
C. Abnormal T cell numbers
D. Defective neutrophil chemotaxis
E. Reduced C4 levels
32. A 10 month old infant girl is admitted to the hospital with signs of
Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia. Studies of her peripheral blood
demonstrate age normal counts of CD19+ cells, but CD3+ and CD4+
cell numbers are depressed. Immunoelectrophoresis of her serum reveals
a moderate hypogammaglobulinemia. Her peripheral blood lymphocytes
proliferate normally in response to phytohemagglutinin and MHC class I
mismatched allogeneic cells. In a one way mixed lymphocyte reaction using
her cells as the stimulator cells, allogeneic T lymphocytes did not proliferate.
Which of the following best describes the molecule most likely lacking from
her lymphocytes?
A. It is designed to bind endogenously produced peptides
B. It is designed to bind exogenously processed peptides
C. It possesses β2 microglobulin
D. It possesses two chains of unequal length
E. It should be present on all nucleated cells in the body
DISEASES CAUSED BY IMMUNE RESPONSES:
HYPERSENSITIVITY AND AUTOIMMUNITY
33. A 36 year old farmer has been exposed to poison ivy on several different
occasions, and he usually gets very severe skin lesions. A pharmaceutical
company is developing cytokines by recombinant DNA technology and
formulating them in a fashion that they are readily absorbed through the
skin. Which of the following cytokines administered topically could inhibit
the severity of this reaction?
A. γ Interferon
B. IL 2
C. IL 3
D. IL 8
E. IL 10
14
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
34. In native Egyptian populations, children are exposed to the cercariae of the
fluke Schistosoma mansoni in early childhood when they wade in irrigation
ditches throughout the Nile Delta. On first exposure, the cercariae penetrate
the skin and become schistosomula, which enter the circulation and
eventually mature in the mesenteric veins. On subsequent exposures,
schistosomula are frequently killed within minutes by an immune response
in the skin manifested by intense itching, stinging, and urticaria. What is
this protective immune response a manifestation of?
A. Arthus reaction
B. Contact dermatitis
C. Passive cutaneous anaphylaxis
D. Serum sickness
E. Type I hypersensitivity
TRANSPLANTATION IMMUNOLOGY
35. A 42 year old auto mechanic has been diagnosed with end stage renal
disease. His twin brother is HLA identical at all MHC loci and volunteers to
donate a kidney to his brother. What type of graft transplant terminology is
correct in this situation?
A. Allograft
B. Autograft
C. Heterograft
D. Isograft
E. Xenograft
36. A patient with acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) undergoes irradia
tion and chemotherapy for his malignancy while awaiting bone marrow
transplantation from a closely matched sibling. Six months after the
transplant, the immune response appears to be reconstituting itself
well—until 9 months postinfusion, when symptoms of generalized rash
with desquamation, jaundice, and bloody diarrhea begin to appear.
A second, more closely matched bone marrow donor is sought unsuc
cessfully, and 10 months after the transfer, the patient dies. What is the
immunologic effector mechanism most closely associated with this
rejection reaction?
A. Activated macrophages
B. Antibodies and complement
C. CD8+ lymphocytes
D. LAK cells
E. NK cells
14
IMMUNOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
37. A child who requires a kidney transplant has been offered a kidney by both
parents and 3 siblings. A one way mixed lymphocyte reaction between
prospective donors and recipient is performed, and the stimulation indices
are shown. The stimulation index is the ratio of proliferation (measured
by [3H] thymidine incorporation) of the experimental group versus the
negative control group. Which of the prospective donors would be the best
choice?
Irradiated Stimulator Cells
Responder Cells Recipient Father Mother Sibling 1 Sibling 2 Sibling 3
Recipient 1.0 4.1 2.3 1.1 8.3 8.5
Father 5.3 1.0 12.3 5.6 4.9 5.9
Mother 3.2 12.6 1.0 4.5 3.9 4.8
Sibling 1 1.6 6.5 5.5 1.0 4.4 6.0
Sibling 2 7.6 5.9 4.9 4.4 1.0 7.8
Sibling 3 9.0 5.7 4.4 7.0 8.9 1.0
A. Father
B. Mother
C. Sibling 1
D. Sibling 2
E. Sibling 3
LABORATORY TECHNIQUES IN IMMUNOLOGY
38. A direct Coombs test was performed on a baby in its seventh month of
gestation. The mother has had trouble with two earlier pregnancies, and
she has never received RhoGAMTM. The physician is concerned about the
possibility of erythroblastosis fetalis. What ingredients would be necessary
to perform this procedure?
A. Mother’s serum plus RhoGAM plus Coombs reagent
B. Mother’s serum plus Rh RBCs plus Coombs reagent
C. RhoGAM plus Rh+ RBCs from the baby
D. Rh+ RBCs from the baby plus Coombs reagent
E. Rh+ RBCs plus mother’s serum plus Coombs reagent
14
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
39. A patient with Chediak Higashi syndrome is analyzed for ability to mobilize
NK cells into the peripheral blood. His peripheral blood leukocytes are
treated with fluorescent labeled antibodies to CD3, CD56, and CD20 before
they are passed through a fluorescence activated cell sorter. The computer
generated results of this process are shown. In which quadrant of which
panel would the natural killer cells be found?
Panel 1 Panel 2
A B A B
CD 3 CD 3
C D C D
CD 56 CD 20
A. Panel 1, quadrant A
B. Panel 1, quadrant B
C. Panel 1, quadrant C
D. Panel 1, quadrant D
E. Panel 2, quadrant A
F. Panel 2, quadrant B
G. Panel 2, quadrant C
H. Panel 2, quadrant D
40. In both ABO blood typing and the Coombs test for detection of hemolytic
disease of the newborn, agglutination of coated erythrocytes is a positive
test result. Why is addition of Coombs reagent not a necessary step in ABO
blood typing?
A. All antibodies made in response to blood glycoproteins are IgG
B. Complement mediated lysis is not important in ABO incompatibilities
C. Coombs serum identifies only anti Rh antibodies
D. IgM pentamers are large enough to agglutinate erythrocytes directly
E. The high titer of natural isohemagglutinins makes Coombs reagent
unnecessary
14
IMMUNOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
ANSWERS AND EXPLANATIONS
Immunology Practice Questions
1. Answer: D. Alternative RNA splicing allows a mature B cell to attach either
δ or μ constant domains on a single idiotype that has been generated by
germ line DNA rearrangements.
Allelic exclusion (choice A) refers to the expression of products of either
parental chromosome type, but not both. This allows lymphoid cells to
express only one type of antigen receptor (one idiotype) per cell and is
essential to cellular specificity of action.
Allelic codominance (choice B) refers to the expression of products of both
parental chromosomes simultaneously. It is found in the expression of
MHC class I and II products, but not in the expression of antigen receptors.
Affinity maturation (choice C) refers to the increase of affinity (binding
strength) of a population of antibodies over time during the development of
an immune response. Because the affinity of an antibody is dependent on
the goodness of fit of its idiotype for its antigen, isotype switching does not
affect the shape of the idiotype and does not change the affinity of the
molecule.
Somatic hypermutation (choice E) is the phenomenon that allows affinity
maturation to occur. It is the accelerated mutation of DNA coding within
the hypervariable region that occurs during B cell proliferation in response
to antigenic stimulation. Again, the isotype of the antibody does not affect
the shape of the idiotype, and this term refers to a process that changes the
shape of the idiotype.
2. Answer: E. This child has acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), and the
malignant cells have the characteristics of early B cell precursors. This
leukemia has peak incidence at approximately 4 years of age, is twice as
common in whites than in non whites, and is slightly more frequent in
boys than in girls. A leukemic cell that is positive for terminal deoxyribo
nucleotidyl transferase (Tdt) is in the process of rearranging the gene seg
ments for synthesis of the heavy chain of immunoglobulin but will not yet
have completed a functional product. Tdt is active for all heavy domain
gene segment rearrangements but is not used during light chain gene seg
ment rearrangements.
IgM monomers inserted in the membrane (choice A) would be found in
leukemic cells that are at the mature B cell stage. Such cells would have
completed the rearrangements for both heavy and light chains and would
lack Tdt as a marker. They would express surface MHC class II, CD19, and
CD20 in addition to surface immunoglobulin.
IgM monomers present in the cytoplasm (choice B) would be found in cells
that have completed the rearrangement of their variable domain gene seg
ments. They would no longer express Tdt.
Mu (μ) chains inserted in the membrane (choice C) would be found in cells
that have completed the rearrangement of their heavy chain variable
domain gene segments, and these may transiently be expressed on the
surface of a cell in association with a surrogate light chain before light
chain rearrangement is complete. These cells would not be using their Tdt
anymore.
14
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Mu (μ) chains in the cytoplasm (choice D) would be found in leukemic
cells that are more highly differentiated than those described. Once the
variable domain gene segments for the heavy chain have been successfully
rearranged in a cell, μ chains can be found in the cytoplasm. In ALL, this is
usually associated with a decreased expression of Tdt and appearance of
CD10 (the common acute lymphoblastic leukemia antigen; CALLA) and
CD20.
3. Answer: E. The cytokine most strongly associated with stimulation of pro
duction of lymphoid cells from the bone marrow is interleukin (IL) 7.
IL 1 (choice A) is the endogenous pyrogen. It is produced by macrophages
and acts on the hypothalamus to raise the temperature set point. It is asso
ciated with systemic inflammatory processes, but is not known to have an
effect on lymphopoiesis.
IL 2 (choice B) is a product of T cells that stimulates proliferation of T cells
in the periphery. It is not known to have an effect on lymphopoiesis.
IL 3 (choice C) is the cytokine that is most strongly associated with stimu
lation of myeloid cell precursors in the bone marrow.
IL 6 (choice D) is a second endogenous pyrogen. It causes production of
acute phase proteins from hepatocytes and acts on myeloid stem cells in the
bone marrow to induce differentiation.
4. Answer: D. CD3 is the signal transduction complex in T lymphocytes.
When specific antigen binding has occurred on the surface of the cell, this
complex is responsible for transferring the message to the cytoplasm of the
cell. This culminates in intracytoplasmic phosphorylation events, which
activate the cell and induce its proliferation (cloning). A cell lacking CD3
would be capable of binding specific antigen, but incapable of activation
and proliferation in response to that first signal.
Ability to bind cell bound peptides (choice A) would not be affected by the
absence of CD3. Binding to peptides presented by antigen presenting cells
is through interaction of the T cell receptor with major histocompatibility
antigens on the surface of other cells.
Ability to express coreceptors (choice B) would not be affected by the
absence of CD3, although cells would not be able to complete their differ
entiation in the thymus and become fully committed T cells.
Ability to produce terminal deoxyribonucleotidyl transferase (choice C)
would not be affected by the absence of the T cell signal transduction
complex. T cell precursors rearrange their receptor gene segments (and
use terminal deoxyribonucleotidyl transferase) in the absence of antigenic
stimulation and before signal transduction through CD3 becomes critical.
Ability to rearrange T cell receptor gene segments (choice E) would not be
affected by the absence of the T cell signal transduction complex. T cell pre
cursors rearrange their receptor gene segments in the absence of antigenic
stimulation and before signal transduction through CD3 becomes critical.
5. Answer: D. The best markers for identification of B lymphocytes are CD19,
CD20, and CD21. CD19 and CD21 form a coreceptor complex during
B cell activation. The role of CD20 in B cell activation is unclear, although
it forms a calcium ion channel. CD21 is also a receptor for the C3d compo
nent of complement and the Epstein Barr virus.
14
IMMUNOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
CD3 (choice A) is the signal transduction complex of T cells. It is found on
all T cells in association with the T cell antigen receptor.
CD4 (choice B) is found on all helper T lymphocytes.
CD8 (choice C) is found on all cytotoxic T lymphocytes.
CD56 (choice E) is a marker for human natural killer cells.
6. Answer: C. This patient has a T cell lymphoblastic lymphoma. In his case,
the malignant cell is “double positive”: it possesses both CD4 and CD8. In a
normal individual, these would only be found as an early developmental
stage in the cortex of the thymus. Once cells have rearranged their receptor
genes and been subjected to positive and negative selection, the cells leaving
the thymus will express one coreceptor or the other but never both.
Bone marrow (choice A) would contain T lymphocyte precursors that are
double negative: They will lack both CD4 and CD8.
Peripheral blood (choice B) would have mature T cells that have differenti
ated into either helper (CD4+) or cytotoxic (CD8+) cells. There should be
no double positive T cells in the peripheral blood.
Thymic medulla (choice D) is the location of maturing T cells ready to cir
culate into the bloodstream and peripheral lymphoid organs. It would have
only single positive cells.
Splenic periarteriolar lymphoid sheaths (choice E) are the T cell–dependent
areas of the spleen. They would have fully committed helper (CD4+) or
cytotoxic (CD8+) cells.
7. Answer: A. The spleen is the secondary lymphoid organ that is responsible
for primary surveillance against blood borne antigens. Babesia microti is an
intraerythrocytic parasite of humans, transmitted by the same vector tick as
Lyme disease. Red blood cells (and their parasites) are filtered by the spleen,
so splenectomy is a predisposing factor in development of serious disease
with this parasite.
Bordetella pertussis (choice B) is a mucosal surface pathogen that attaches
to the upper airways. Although its toxin becomes blood borne, the organ
ism itself is confined to the respiratory tree.
Corynebacterium diphtheriae (choice C) is a mucosal surface pathogen that
attaches to the upper airways. Although its toxin becomes blood borne, the
organism itself is confined to the respiratory tree.
Enteroaggregative Escherichia coli (choice D) is an organism that causes
diarrhea by producing a biofilm like aggregation of organisms on the sur
face of the colonic mucosa, which impedes absorption. It is not likely to be
a blood borne pathogen.
Human papilloma virus (choice E) produces localized infections in epithe
lial cells where it is transferred by human to human or human to fomite
contact. It is not likely to be a blood borne pathogen.
14
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
8. Answer: E. The cortex of lymph nodes is a B lymphocyte area. Thus, cells
in this area would stain with fluorescent antibodies against CD19, the mole
cule that serves as a portion of the B cell signal transduction complex. This
molecule would be found on all B cells, but would be absent from T cells,
macrophages, and NK cells.
CD2 (choice A) is a T cell marker. T cells will be found in the paracortical
areas of lymph nodes.
CD3 (choice B) is a T cell marker. It is the signal transduction complex of
the T cell and will be found on all T cells. T cells will be found in the para
cortical areas of lymph nodes.
CD4 (choice C) is a marker for helper T cells. These cells would be found
in the paracortical areas of lymph nodes.
CD16 (choice D) is the Fc receptor for IgG antibodies. It would be found
on natural killer and phagocytic cells, which would not be numerous in the
cortex of the lymph nodes. Phagocytic cells typically are found in the med
ullary cords.
9. Answer: E. Lymph nodes are designed to filter tissue fluids. Fluids entering
the lymph nodes do so through the afferent lymphatics and are released
into the subcapsular sinus. From there, fluids percolate through the cortex,
into the medulla, through the medullary cords, and finally exit through the
efferent lymphatics in the hilum.
The cortex (choice A) of the lymph node is directly beneath the subcapsu
lar sinus. It would be the second region of the lymph node to be exposed to
the radioactive tracer. The cortex is a B lymphocyte–rich area.
The medulla (choice B) of the lymph node is rich in macrophages. It would
not receive the radioactive fluid until it had passed through the cortex and
paracortex.
The paracortex (choice C) of the lymph node is a T cell area. It lies between
the cortex and the medulla and thus would receive the radioactive fluid
after the cortical areas.
Primary follicles (choice D) are found in the cortex of the lymph node.
These are areas of active B lymphocyte proliferation and cloning. They
would receive the radioactivity after it left the subcapsular sinus.
10. Answer: B. Many drug allergies, such as the one described here, are hapten
carrier immune responses. The drug is not large enough by itself to elicit an
immune response (it is a hapten), but when it becomes covalently coupled
to the body’s own proteins (which act as carriers), the combined molecule
becomes immunogenic, and a response against one’s own tissues is elicited.
Acting as a B cell mitogen (choice A) is not correct. B cell mitogens, such
as pokeweed mitogen and lipopolysaccharide, cause polyclonal proliferation
of B cells and elaboration of IgM antibodies. The drug allergy described
here is not a polyclonal response, but a specific anti–altered self response
generated by T and B lymphocytes and production of antibodies.
14
IMMUNOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
Acting as a provider of costimulatory signals (choice C) is not correct. The
costimulatory signals required to activate B and T lymphocytes include
CD28/B7 and CD40/CD40L interactions. These are additional interactions
(beyond the specific recognition of antigen) required for the activation of
B and T lymphocytes. Although these costimulatory signals would be
involved in the evolution of this allergic response, the streptomycin does
not serve as a costimulatory signal.
Acting as a superantigen (choice D) is not correct. Superantigens are mate
rials that crosslink the variable β domain of the T cell receptor and the
α chain of class II MHC molecules. They induce activation of all T cells
that express receptors with a particular Vβ domain. The resulting T cell
mitogenesis causes overproduction of T cell and macrophage cytokines and
system wide pathology. Toxic shock syndrome toxin 1 and Streptococcus
pyogenes erythrogenic exotoxins act as superantigens.
Acting as an immunogen (choice E) is not correct because streptomycin is
not large enough to be immunogenic. Immunogens must be large enough
to have at least two epitopes. It is only through binding to a larger carrier
protein (the patient’s own tissue proteins) that a hapten such as a drug can
become immunogenic.
11. Answer: B. This child has leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD), which is a
genetic deficiency of CD18. CD18 is an essential component of a number of
integrins, and absence of these molecules causes the inability of WBCs to
migrate into sites of inflammation. Thus in this patient, the blood con
tained abnormally high numbers of neutrophils, but they were unable to
extravasate. CD18 is a component of LFA 1, CR3, and CR4.
Absence of CCR4 (choice A) would cause difficulties in extravasation and
migration of activated T cells and monocytes. This chemokine receptor is
not found on neutrophils and therefore would have no effect on neutrophil
migration.
Absence of interleukin 1 (choice C) might cause difficulties in producing
the acute and chronic inflammatory responses. This cytokine, frequently
referred to as the endogenous pyrogen, produces fever, acute phase protein
production, and many other results critical to inflammation. However, the
actions of IL 1 are extremely redundant with those of IL 6 and tumor
necrosis factor α, so such a condition might have no clinically observable
effects.
Absence of interleukin 4 (choice D) would result in defects in the ability to
mount a normal IgE antibody response. This cytokine also serves as the
major stimulus for the development of Th2 cells from naive helper T cells,
so its absence would be likely to have profound effects on all aspects of the
secondary antibody response.
Absence of tumor necrosis factor α (choice E) might cause difficulties in
producing the acute and chronic inflammatory responses. This cytokine has
many functions that are redundant with those of IL 1 and IL 6, so such a
condition might have no clinically observable effects.
14
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
12. Answer: D. This child has chronic granulomatous disease (CGD). The
history indicates he has had recurrent infections with catalase positive
organisms and has a defect in generating oxygen radicals intracellularly in
his phagocytic cells (the negative nitroblue tetrazolium test and neutrophil
oxidative index). This genetic defect arises from a failure to produce one of
the subunits of NADPH oxidase, which makes the individual incapable of
producing intracellular oxygen radicals. Redundant intracellular killing
mechanisms (myeloperoxidase and lysosomal contents) are still functional
in these patients, but when they are infected with catalase positive organ
isms, the substrate for myeloperoxidase (hydrogen peroxide) is destroyed,
and the only remaining intracellular killing mechanism (lysosomes) is
insufficient to protect from infection.
C3 deficiency (choice A) would cause increased susceptibility to pyogenic
infections because C3b is an important opsonin that enhances phagocytosis
of extracellular organisms. All extracellular bacteria would be included in
this list, not simply catalase positive ones, as mentioned here. The NBT and
NOI would not be negative in this case.
Deficiency of CD18 (choice B) is the cause of leukocyte adhesion deficien
cy (LAD). Because CD18 is the common β chain of the β2 integrins, its
absence compromises leukocyte function antigen (LFA) 1, as well as com
plement receptors 3 and 4. Patients with LAD suffer recurrent infections
with extracellular pathogens (not just catalase positive ones) because of
defective opsonization, mobilization, adhesion, and chemotaxis. The NBT
and NOI would be positive.
Deficiency of myeloperoxidase (choice C) results from a deficiency of an
important granule enzyme in phagocytic cells. However, because there are
so many redundant mechanisms of intracellular killing, these patients gen
erally have mild symptoms or none at all.
A phagocyte granule structural defect (choice E) is responsible for the
Chediak Higashi syndrome. These patients have chemotactic and degranu
lation defects, lack NK activity, and have partial albinism.
13. Answer: D. IL 2, IFN γ, and TNF β are all elaborated by the Th1 cell.
TNF β can also be made by NK cells. In tuberculoid leprosy, the Th1 arm
of the immune response is most active, resulting in a protective (but also
damaging)cell mediated response and a dampening of the antibody
response. In lepromatous leprosy, the patient has an overabundance of Th2
responses, causing the production of a nonprotective antibody response.
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (choice A) are an effector cell in the cell mediated
immune response. They do not elaborate many cytokines but produce cyto
toxic molecules, which cause the destruction of specific target cells.
Epithelioid cells (choice B) are modified macrophages. They are extremely
secretory and may produce IL 1, IL 6, TNF α, IFN γ, and GM CSF. They
are prominent in granulomas, and their cytokines would be elevated in a
patient with tuberculoid leprosy, but that was not the question.
Macrophages (choice C), once activated, may produce IL 1, IL 6, TNF α,
IFN γ, and GM CSF. They are prominent in granulomas, and their cyto
kines would be elevated in a patient with tuberculoid leprosy, but again,
that was not the question.
15
IMMUNOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
Th2 cells (choice E) would be elevated during lepromatous leprosy. The
cytokines they secrete include IL 4, IL 5, IL 6, IL 10, IL 13 and TGFβ.
These cells are stimulators of the humoral immune response.
14. Answer: C. In lepromatous leprosy, the activation of the Th2 arm of the
immune response results in elicitation of those cytokines that stimulate
production of antibody (IL 4, IL 5, IL 6, IL 10, IL 13 and TGFβ) and those
that inhibit the development of the protective cell mediated immune
response (IL 4 and IL 10). Therefore, hypergammaglobulinemia is a fre
quent finding in lepromatous leprosy.
Autoimmunity (choice A) may develop after infectious processes, but there
is no evidence that stimulation of Th2 cells, by itself, causes autoimmune
disease.
Granuloma formation (choice B) would be decreased after exposure to
these cytokines. Granulomas are an expression of the delayed type hyper
sensitivity response, which is a function of Th1 cells. IL 10 and IL 4 would
depress the Th1 response.
Immediate hypersensitivity (choice D) requires sensitized mast cells and
IgE antibodies. Although this result could occur in persons predisposed to
atopic allergy, it is not the most likely result of stimulation with Th2
cytokines.
Inflammation (choice E) is primarily mediated by substances released
during tissue injury (leukotrienes, histamine, etc.) and the cytokines of
activated macrophages (IL 1, IL 6, and TNF α). It is not enhanced by Th2
cytokines.
15. Answer: D. This patient is showing signs of toxic shock syndrome, caused by
infection of the blister with Staphylococcus aureus and the resultant elabora
tion of the exotoxin TSST 1. This toxin acts as a superantigen, cross linking
the variable β region of the TCR to the α chain of the class II MHC molecule.
This binds Th cells and APC together without the specificity of antigen rec
ognition, and so clonal proliferation of T cells and production of IFN γ leads
to activation of macrophages. As a result, the macrophages overproduce the
cytokines IL 1, IL 6, and TNF α, which are toxic at high levels.
It acts as an IL 1 homologue (choice A) is not true. IL 1 is produced by
macrophages as a result of T cell activation, but TSST 1 does not itself act
as an IL 1 homologue.
It activates B lymphocytes polyclonally (choice B) is not true. TSST 1 acts
on Th cells to stimulate macrophage cytokines. It does not have a direct
effect on B cell proliferation.
It activates complement (choice C) is not correct. TSST 1 does not have an
effect on complement.
It stimulates neutrophils (choice E) is not correct. Although neutrophils are
stimulated during Staphylococcus aureus infection and produce IL 1, which
causes fever, the mechanism of action of TSST 1 and other superantigens is
not through neutrophil activation.
16. Answer: A. The B7 molecule on antigen presenting cells binds to the CD28
molecule on T lymphocytes and serves as a costimulatory signal for their
activation. If the tumor cells could be induced to express this costimulatory
molecule, they would provide the important activating signal to the T cells.
15
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
CD2 (choice B) is the molecule on T lymphocytes that binds to LFA 3 on
antigen presenting cells. If the tumor cell were induced to express CD2, it
would bind to the complementary structure on macrophages and not acti
vate the T cells.
CD4 (choice C) is the molecule on T lymphocytes that stabilizes the inter
action of MHC class II and the TCR. If the tumor cell were induced to
express CD4, it would not increase the tumor specific response.
CD28 (choice D) is the molecule on T cells that binds to B7. If the tumor
cell were induced to express CD28, it would bind to the complementary
structure on macrophages and not activate the T cells.
LFA 1 (choice E) is the molecule on T cells that binds ICAM 1 on the
antigen presenting cells. If the tumor cells were induced to express LFA 1,
it would bind to the complementary structure on macrophages and not
activate the T cells.
17. Answer: D. CD25 positive TReg cells have been shown to have a role in
maintenance of self tolerance, and therefore, defects in these cells are being
blamed in many cases of autoimmune disease. TReg cells secrete interleu
kin 10 which is an anti inflammatory cytokine.
Interferon gamma (choice A) is a product of Th1 which activates macro
phages and amplifies pro inflammatory pathways in the body. It is not a
product of TReg cells and would cause additional damage in a case of rheu
matoid arthritis, so it would not be a logical goal of therapy.
Interleukin 1 (choice B) is endogenous pyrogen which is responsible for
the setting of the hypothalamic temperature point. It is a product of macro
phages which activates Th1 cells, and therefore would be considered a pro
inflammatory cytokine rather than an anti inflammatory one.
Interleukin 2 (choice C) is a product of Th0 and Th1 cells which causes the
proliferation of T cells and the effector cells of cell mediated immunity.
Although IL 2 is required for natural TReg development, it would not be
expected to be increased with the therapy mentioned here.
Transforming growth factor beta (choice E) is a product of T cells and
macrophages which is required for natural TReg development, but with this
artificial therapy to increase TReg numbers, it would not be expected to be
elevated.
18. Answer: A. Isohemagglutinins are IgM antibodies that will agglutinate the
RBCs of individuals with another blood type. They are believed to be made
due to exposure to cross reactive antigens found on the surface of normal
gut flora organisms. Thus, a person of blood group A will produce isohem
agglutinins that will agglutinate type B cells. If these antibodies are pretreat
ed with pepsin, a divalent F(ab′)2 fragment and destruction of the Fc will
result. A divalent fragment is capable of causing agglutination.
Lysed (choice B) is not correct because it would require the integrity of the
complement binding regions of the IgM, which are found in the Fc, and the
question stem does not provide complement in the mix.
Phagocytized (choice C) is not correct because it would require an intact
cell binding region in the Fc, and the question stem does not provide
phagocytic cells in the mix.
15
IMMUNOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
Precipitated (choice D) would be the correct answer if the antigen in ques
tion were a soluble protein. Proteins precipitate when treated with specific
antibodies, particles agglutinate. The two particles used in laboratory medi
cine are latex beads and erythrocytes. If neither of these is mentioned, then
the student can assume that treatment would result in precipitation, not
agglutination. Precipitation has exactly the same requirements as agglutina
tion: a divalent antigen binding molecule.
Unaffected (choice E) would be the correct answer if papain had been used to
treat the isohemagglutinins. Because papain produces two monovalent Fab
fragments, these are incapable of cross linking antigen (whether soluble pro
tein or particle), so neither agglutination nor precipitation would be possible.
19. Answer: E. The only way to identify a neonatal infection serologically is by
detection of pathogen specific IgM antibodies. This is because the fetus
receives IgG antibodies from the mother by active transport across the pla
centa. Because you cannot identify the source of the antibodies, IgG detec
tion in the child can simply reflect this natural passive type of protection.
Because IgM does not cross the placenta, any IgM detected in the neonate is
being produced in the child and is reflective of a response to infection. In
this way, all children born to HIV infected mothers will be seropositive by
both ELISA and Western blot, but only 20% will actually be infected in
utero, even in the absence of antiviral therapy.
IgA (choice A) does not usually begin to be produced by a child until one
to two years after birth. At the end of the first year, most children have no
more than 20% of adult values, so it would not be a useful diagnostic in
the neonate. Additionally, because Toxoplasma gondii is an intracellular
parasite, IgA would not be the most effective immune response in any
individual.
IgD (choice B) will be produced by an infected neonate along with IgM
because of alternative RNA splicing, but this is not a useful diagnostic. IgD
rarely reaches levels easily detected by serology, and the immunoglobulin
has the shortest half life of all the immunoglobulins. The function of secret
ed IgD, if any, is not clear, so it is not a useful serologic test.
IgE (choice C) does not usually begin to be produced by a child until well
into the second year after birth. Additionally, because Toxoplasma gondii is
an intracellular parasite, IgE would not be the most effective immune
response in any individual.
IgG (choice D) is not a useful serologic test in a neonate because it is
impossible to determine the origin of such molecules. Children infected in
utero will begin to produce IgG due to isotype switching late in gestation,
but because the placenta is actively transporting all maternal IgG into the
fetus, it is not possible to distinguish whether the child is actually infected
or simply passively protected using this technique.
20. Answer: B. IgM and secretory IgA are similar in that they are held together
by a J chain synthesized by the B cell or plasma cell. Without the presence
of the J chain, IgM would exist only in monomeric form, and the macro
globulin peak would be absent on electrophoresis. Because pentameric IgM
is important for capturing newly introduced foreign antigen and thus
beginning the immune response, the child is delayed in his development of
protective responses to vaccination. Because secretory IgA is a dimer that
protects the mucosal surfaces, such a child would be especially susceptible
to infectious agents crossing the mucosal surfaces.
15
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Absence of CD40 (choice A) would affect the production of IgG, IgA, and
IgE, but would not prevent macroglobulin synthesis. Indeed, most patients
with this defect have hyper macroglobulinemia because the CD40/CD40L
interaction is necessary for isotype switching.
Absence of IL 4 (choice C) would cause problems with the ability to pro
duce IgG, IgA, and IgE. This cytokine, produced by Th2 cells, is necessary
for the differentiation and development of most antibody responses other
than IgM. Thus, IgM levels either would not be affected or would be
increased in a compensatory fashion.
Absence of Tdt (choice D) would cause problems with the patient’s ability
to perform the genetic rearrangements necessary to form the idiotype of the
antibody molecule. They would not affect the isotype of antibody produced.
Absence of Th2 cells (choice E) would affect the production of IgG, IgA,
and IgE, but would not affect IgM production.
21. Answer: B. One of the most effective protective responses to infections
with extracellular, encapsulated bacteria, such as Streptococcus pneumoniae,
is complement mediated opsonization. Because IgM is the most effective
antibody at activating complement, generation of C3b fragments during
this process coats the bacteria and makes them more susceptible to inges
tion and intracellular killing by cells of the phagocytic system.
ADCC (choice A), or antibody dependent cell mediated cytotoxicity, is a
mechanism by which NK cells, neutrophils, macrophages, and eosinophils
can use their Fc receptor to bind specific antibody and target an agent for
lysis. No cells have Fc receptors for IgM, so this is not a mechanism that
could act in concert with early IgM production.
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (choice C) identify altered self/MHC class I mol
ecule conjugates on the surfaces of cells that are malignantly transformed or
infected with intracellular pathogens. They are not a protective mechanism
that acts in concert with any antibody molecule.
LAK cells (choice D), or lymphokine activated killer cells, are NK cells that
have been stimulated in vitro with cytokines that enhance their killing
activity. These cells have a function in early surveillance against altered self
cells, but are not believed to play a role in protection against extracellular
pathogens, such as this one.
NK cells (choice E) are members of the innate immune system and are
believed to play a role in surveillance against tumor cells and other altered
self cells that fail to express MHC class I antigens on their surfaces. They
would not act in concert with IgM production, and they would not be effec
tive against an extracellular pathogen, such as this one.
22. Answer: A. The mucosal associated lymphoid tissues (MALT) are the
major sites of synthesis of IgA. IgA is a dimeric molecule held together by a
Jchain similar to that used in IgM. As IgA is transported across the epithe
lial surface, it acquires the secretory component, which functions both in
transepithelial transport and protection from proteolytic cleavage.
A monomeric immunoglobulin that crosses the placenta (choice B)
describes IgG. IgG is the major immunoglobulin of the blood and is pro
duced in lymph nodes and spleen, but less commonly in the MALT.
15
IMMUNOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
A monomeric immunoglobulin bound by mast cells (choice C) describes IgE.
IgE is the immunoglobulin that causes immediate hypersensitivity by virtue
of its attraction to the Fc receptors of mast cells. It is not the major immuno
globulin produced in the MALT, although it may be produced there.
A monomeric immunoglobulin that opsonizes (choice D) describes IgG.
IgG is the major immunoglobulin of the blood and is produced in lymph
nodes and spleen, but less commonly in the MALT.
A pentameric immunoglobulin that activates complement (choice E)
describes IgM. IgM is the major immunoglobulin of the primary immune
response and is produced in lymph nodes and spleen, but less commonly in
the MALT.
23. Answer: A. The killer cells cytotoxic to targets lacking MHC class I anti
gens are NK cells. These cells are members of the innate immune response,
and as such their response is not enhanced over time. The most specific,
inducible cytotoxic cells in the body are cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs),
which depend on MHC class I recognition of their target. Because this
question asks how the tumor cells can be altered to make them better stim
ulators of an immune response, one approach would be to increase their
expression of MHC class I molecules. This can be accomplished by treat
ment of the tumor cells with interferon (IFN) γ. IFN γ increases expression
of both class I and II MHC products on cells.
IL 2 (choice B) is a product of Th1 lymphocytes and induces proliferation
of antigen primed Th and cytotoxic T cells. It also supports their long term
growth. It would not have an effect on this patient’s tumor cells.
IL 8 (choice C) is a product of macrophages and endothelial cells and acts
on neutrophils to cause their chemotaxis and extravasation into tissues. It
would not have an effect on this patient’s tumor cells.
IL 10 (choice D) is a product of Th2 cells and acts on macrophages to sup
press their cytokine production. It therefore indirectly reduces cytokine
production by Th1 cells and dampens the activation of the cell mediated
arm of the immune response. It would not have an effect on this patient’s
tumor cells.
TNF β (choice E) is a product of macrophages and NK cells and acts on
tumor cells to cause direct cytotoxicity. It acts on inflammatory cells to
induce cytokine secretion and causes the cachexia associated with chronic
inflammation. It would not cause the patient’s tumor cells to stimulate bet
ter immunity.
24. Answer: A. Although the ablation of the thymus in early childhood will
ultimately have far reaching consequences in the development of many
immune responses, the immune surveillance of tumors is performed only
by cytotoxic T cells and NK cells, and thus would be profoundly affected by
this treatment. Although NK cell numbers would not be affected by loss of
the thymus, in the absence of Th1 cell cytokines, they would not be able to
increase in number in response to challenge. Other parameters that could
be depressed include immune responses to intracellular pathogens and sec
ondary antibody responses.
Depressed oxygen dependent killing by neutrophils (choice B) would not
be expected in this case because neutrophils are components of the innate
immune response and function in the absence of T cell help.
15
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Depressed primary response to soluble antigens (choice C) would not be
expected in this case because the IgM response to many antigens is T cell
independent. It is class switching that would be impossible without T cell
help.
Increased cellularity of lymph node paracortical areas (choice D) would not
be expected in this case because the paracortex of lymph nodes is a T cell
area. Therefore, following thymic irradiation, decreased cellularity of these
regions would occur.
Increased tendency toward atopy (choice E) would not be expected in this
case because atopic allergies are those that involve IgE antibodies and mast
cells. IgE cannot be produced without T cell help, so athymic individuals
will have decreased tendency toward atopy.
25. Answer: A. The Mantoux test, or tuberculin test (or simply the TB skin
test), is the classic clinical demonstration of the function of the delayed
type hypersensitivity response. This is a cell mediated reaction caused by
sensitization of Th1 cells and demonstrated by the influx and activation of
macrophages in response to the cytokines that they elaborate.
That a humoral immune response has occurred (choice B) is not true.
Antibodies are not involved in the production of a DTH response, and
they are not important products during infections with most intracellular
pathogens.
That the B cell system is functional (choice C) is not true. B cells do not
play a role in the DTH response, and they do not play a major role in
defense during infections with most intracellular pathogens.
That the B and T cell systems are functional (choice D) is not true. The
DTH response certainly demonstrates that the Th1 response is functional,
but it says nothing about the function of B cells.
That the neutrophilic phagocyte system is functional (choice E) is not true.
Neutrophils do not play a role in the elicitation of the DTH response.
Neutrophils are the important cells in abscess formation, not granuloma
formation.
26. Answer: D. The protective response to the tetanus toxoid depends on pro
duction of antibodies that prevent the binding of the toxin. After repeated
immunizations, the population of memory B cells is stimulated, which is
the goal of such prophylaxis. Memory B cells may have IgG, IgA, or occa
sionally IgE on their surfaces serving as antigen receptors.
That their receptors would have high avidity (choice A) is not true because
avidity decreases with repeated booster inoculations. This is because IgM,
which is the immunoglobulin of the primary immune response and is the
receptor on mature naive B lymphocytes, is replaced in secondary and sub
sequent responses by isotype switching to other isotypes such as IgG or IgA
or IgE. All of these molecules have less avidity than IgM because they have
fewer combining sites than IgM. The secondary and subsequent responses
should have increased affinity (goodness of fit of idiotype for epitope), but
decreased avidity.
That they would be large and highly metabolic (choice B) is not true
because memory lymphocytes are usually small and in a resting phase of
the cell cycle. Activated lymphocytes are large and highly metabolic.
15
IMMUNOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
That they would have low levels of adhesion molecules (choice C) is not
true because memory lymphocytes express high levels of adhesion mole
cules. This allows them to migrate to areas of active inflammation where
they can have maximum benefit in protection of the host.
That they would have surface IgM (choice E) is not true because this would
describe mature, naive B lymphocytes that have not met their antigen
before. As soon as the primary response begins, isotype switching to other
classes of immunoglobulin is directed by Th cells.
27. Answer: B. In this case, high risk individuals are vaccinated with the sero
type of influenza virus that is predicted to be most common in this flu sea
son. This elicits an active immunologic response in the patient and is artifi
cial by definition because it is being administered in a medical setting. This
sort of immunization causes the development of memory in the patient that
will protect for the whole season, but it requires approximately two weeks
for development of protection.
Adaptive (choice A) immunity describes all immune responses that have
specificity and memory. These immune responses are produced by specific
B and T lymphocytes. Although adaptive immunity will be elicited in these
patients, this is not the best answer because it is imprecise.
Artificial passive (choice C) immunity is achieved when preformed immu
nologic products (immune cells or antibodies) are given to a patient. These
procedures provide passive protection that is rapid but lacks immunologic
memory. Because it is administered in a medical setting, it is, by definition,
artificial.
Natural active (choice D) immunity would result following recovery from
an infection.
Natural passive (choice E) immunity is acquired across the placenta and in
the colostrum and breast milk, from mother to child. The child receives
preformed antibodies (IgG across the placenta and IgA in milk) that protect
the child until a natural active immune response can be mounted.
28. Answer: A. Allotypes are minor amino acid sequence variations in the con
stant domains of heavy and light immunoglobulin chains. Their expression
is genetically determined, and variations can be used as evidence in favor of
paternity in some cases. Allotypic markers are most frequently used in
studies of population genetics, as certain ethnic groups are likely to have
similar allotypic markers on their immunoglobulins. Allotypic markers do
not affect the biologic function of the immunoglobulin molecule.
The term “idiotype” (choice B) describes the 3 dimensional shape of the
antigen combining site of an antibody or T cell receptor molecule. Because
each human is capable of producing many millions of different idiotypic
sequences, these would not be useful in paternity cases.
IgA2 (choice C) is an isotype of immunoglobulin. Because all normal
human beings produce some amount of this immunoglobulin, it would not
be useful in paternity cases.
IgM (choice D) is an isotype of immunoglobulin. Because all normal
human beings produce some amount of this immunoglobulin, it would not
be useful in paternity cases.
15
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
An isotype (choice E) is found in the heavy or light chain constant
domains of an immunoglobulin. Thus, there are 5 heavy chain isotypes
(A, E, G, M, and D) and two light chain isotypes (κ and λ). Because all
human beings produce heavy and light chain isotypes, this would not be
useful in paternity testing.
29. Answer: D. This is a case of DiGeorge syndrome, which is a congenital fail
ure in the formation of the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches. As a
result, individuals with this defect have aplastic thymus and parathyroids
and facial, esophageal, and cardiac malformations. Immunologically, the
absence of the thymus will ultimately have global effects on the develop
ment of all T cell–mediated immune responses. At birth, the child will have
IgG antibodies that have been transplacentally transferred from the mother,
but by 9 months or so after birth, these will be gone and IgM will be the
only isotype of immunoglobulin present. Phagocytic killing will be normal
until that point, although after all the maternal IgG is gone, opsonization of
bacteria will no longer be possible.
Antibody dependent cell mediated cytotoxicity of parasite targets (choice
A) will be depressed in this child because eosinophil mediated ADCC
requires IgE antibodies, and these cannot be produced without T cell help.
Cellularity of splenic periarteriolar lymphoid sheaths (choice B) will be
decreased in this child because these are T cell–dependent areas of the spleen.
Cytotoxic killing of virus infected targets (choice C) will be depressed in
this child because cytotoxic T cells will be absent, and only NK cells will be
available for antiviral protection.
The proliferative response to concanavalin A (choice E) will be depressed
in this child because concanavalin A is a T cell mitogen. If there are no
T cells, there will be no proliferation in response to this mitogen.
30. Answer: A. This is a case of X linked agammaglobulinemia, or Bruton
agammaglobulinemia. It is caused by a mutation in a tyrosine kinase gene,
which is important in B cell maturation. The bone marrow becomes hyper
cellular with cells that cannot progress beyond the pre B stage, while the
peripheral blood lacks mature B lymphocytes. There will be no proliferative
response to B cell mitogens (pokeweed mitogen), and CD19+ cells will be
absent from the blood. Persons with this condition are unable to mount a
normal antibody response; therefore, symptoms appear after the disappear
ance of maternal antibodies. Susceptibility to extracellular, encapsulated
pathogens is profound.
Common variable hypogammaglobulinemia (choice B) is a condition that
usually appears in the late teens or early twenties. It is believed to be an
autoimmune disease and is associated with the disappearance of immuno
globulin isotypes over time.
DiGeorge syndrome (choice C), or congenital thymic aplasia, is a condition in
which there is failure of formation of the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches.
These infants have facial abnormalities, failure of formation of the parathy
roids, and cardiac defects, as well as absence of T lymphocyte development.
Selective immunoglobulin deficiency (choice D) would not be manifested
by a failure of B cell development in the bone marrow. Selective IgA defi
ciency is most common of these and would manifest as increased suscepti
bility to mucosal surface pathogens.
15
IMMUNOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
Wiskott Aldrich syndrome (choice E) is a complex immune deficiency with
a triad of symptoms: eczema, thrombocytopenia, and immunodeficiency. It
is inherited in an X linked recessive fashion. These patients are prone to
development of malignant lymphomas and have inability to respond to
polysaccharide antigens.
31. Answer: E. The description of painful abdominal edema and edema in the
oral mucosa are typical of hereditary angioedema. This is a genetic defi
ciency of complement C1 inhibitor. When this important control protein is
missing, there is excessive use of the classic complement pathway compo
nents, especially C4. This causes abnormal inflammation along the mucosal
surfaces.
Abnormal superoxide anion production by neutrophils (choice A) would
result in predisposition to infections with extracellular pathogens.
Abnormal T cell function (choice B) would result in predisposition to
infections with viral and fungal pathogens, not edema of the mucosal sur
faces.
Abnormal T cell numbers (choice C) would result in predisposition to infec
tions with viral and fungal pathogens, not edema of the mucosal surfaces.
Defective neutrophil chemotaxis (choice D) would result in neutrophilia
and failure to produce pus and abscesses in response to extracellular bacte
rial invasion.
32. Answer: B. This child has bare lymphocyte syndrome, a rare autosomal
recessive disease in which there is absence of MHC class II molecules on
cells. Thus, her cells can recognize other cells as foreign and proliferate to
T cell mitogens, but they cannot be recognized by allogeneic lymphocytes
because they do not express class II MHC antigens on their surface. The
phrase which best describes the MHC class II molecule on this list is that it
is designed to bind exogenously processed peptides. Other descriptions that
could apply would be that it has two chains of similar length, is produced
with an invariant chain, and is designed to present foreign peptides to
Th cells.
It is designed to bind endogenously produced peptides (choice A) is a
description that fits the class I MHC molecule. If this were a case of class I
MHC deficiency, she would not have made a normal proliferative response
to mismatched allogeneic cells.
It possesses β2 microglobulin (choice C) is a description that fits the class I
MHC molecule.
It possesses two chains of unequal length (choice D) is a description of the
class I MHC molecule. It has an α chain with 3 domains, and a smaller
chain, β2 microglobulin, becomes associated with the α chain.
It should be present on all nucleated cells in the body (choice E) describes
the class I MHC molecule. Class II MHC will be found on all antigen
presenting cells in the body.
33. Answer: E. IL 10 is produced by Th2 cells and inhibits Th1 cells. Because
the response to poison ivy is a delayed type hypersensitivity response and
therefore is mediated by Th1 cells and macrophages, inhibiting their activi
ty would minimize the severity of the reaction.
15
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
γ Interferon (choice A) is a product of Th1 cells, CTLs, and NK cells. It
inhibits the proliferation of Th2 cells and therefore would skew the immune
response toward a more potent cell mediated arm. This is not a cytokine
that would help this patient: It would make his condition worse.
IL 2 (choice B) is a product of Th cells that induces the proliferation and
enhances the activity of antigen primed Th cells and CTLs. It would tend to
increase the symptoms of this patient, not ameliorate them.
IL 3 (choice C) is a product of Th cells and NK cells. It acts on hematopoi
etic cells to encourage myeloid cell development. It would neither hinder
nor help this man’s condition.
IL 8 (choice D) is a product of macrophages and endothelial cells and acts
on neutrophils to attract them to areas of inflammation. It would increase
inflammation in the area.
34. Answer: E. The description in the vignette is a type I hypersensitivity reac
tion—the only type of hypersensitivity that can be manifested in minutes.
These are IgE mediated responses and are an important protective response
against helminth parasites that migrate through the tissues.
The Arthus reaction (choice A) is an example of a type III (immune com
plex–mediated) pathology. These hypersensitivities develop when antigen is
added to pre existing antibody and immune complexes are filtered out of
the circulation in the small vasculature. Complement is activated in these
locations, and the underlying tissue is damaged. In this vignette, the killing
is occurring in the skin and is associated within minutes with stinging, itch
ing, and urticaria.
Contact dermatitis (choice B) is an example of a type IV (delayed type)
hypersensitivity response. After the sensitizing exposure, symptoms of this
type of hypersensitivity will occur in 48 to 72 hours (not minutes, as
described here).
Passive cutaneous anaphylaxis (choice C) is an example of a type I hypersensi
tivity reaction, but it is used to diagnose these conditions using passive transfer
of serum. It is not a mechanism of protection, but a diagnostic technique.
Serum sickness (choice D) is an example of a type III (immune complex
mediated) pathology. These hypersensitivities develop when antigen is
added to pre existing antibody and immune complexes are filtered out of
the circulation in the small vasculature. Complement is activated in these
locations, and the underlying tissue is damaged. In this vignette, the killing
is occurring in the skin and is associated within minutes with stinging,
itching, and urticaria.
35. Answer: D. An isograft is performed between genetically identical individ
uals. In human medicine, these are performed between monozygotic twins.
In reality, even these “identical” individuals are not identical because minor
mutations can occur during development. These sorts of grafts still require
immunosuppression for success. They are, however, the best chance for suc
cess other than autografts.
An allograft (choice A) is a transplant between two members of the same
species who are not genetically identical. These are the most common types
of transplants used in medicine, but in this vignette, the twins are described
as having identical MHC haplotypes.
16
IMMUNOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
An autograft (choice B) is a transplant from one location in the body to
another. This is the only form of transplantation that will succeed without
immunosuppression.
“Heterograft” (choice C) is not a word that is used in transplantation
immunology.
A xenograft (choice E) is a transplant that is performed across species
barriers.
36. Answer: C. Graft versus host disease (GVHD) is primarily a manifestation
of sensitization of transplanted T cells against recipient tissues. The killing of
mucosal and other epithelial cells is largely mediated through recognition of
MHC class I incompatibility by transferred cytotoxic cells or their precur
sors. However, eventually, continuous priming by the host’s own tissues will
elicit immune responses at the level of all the cells of the immune system.
Activated macrophages (choice A) are involved in the delayed type hyper
sensitivity response, but are not stimulated by MHC incompatibility, so if
they become involved in pathology, it has to be secondary to Th stimulation.
Antibodies and complement (choice B) are not involved in GVHD. Because
bone marrow is a cellular transplant, it is the cells inside it that start the
problem, not accidentally transferred antibodies or complement.
LAK (lymphokine activated killer) cells (choice D) are believed to be
involved in the rejection of bone marrow transplants by the recipient (host
versus graft), but not in GVHD.
NK cells (choice E) are believed to be involved in the rejection of bone
marrow transplants by the recipient (host versus graft), but not in GVHD.
37. Answer: C. The lowest stimulation index (and the lowest amount of prolif
eration) is shown between sibling 1 and the prospective recipient, both
when the donor cells are used as stimulators and as responders. This means
(most importantly) that the recipient will make little response to the graft
and (less importantly, except in graft versus host disease) that the donor
will make little response against the recipient.
The father (choice A) is not the best choice of donors because the recipient
makes 4 times the proliferative response to his cells as to those of sibling 1.
The mother (choice B) is not the best choice of donors because the recipi
ent makes twice the proliferative response to her cells as to those of sibling
1. She would be the second best choice, unless sibling 1 had an incompati
ble ABO blood group.
Sibling 2 (choice D) is not the best choice of donors because the recipient
makes 8 times the proliferative response to his cells as to those of sibling 1.
Sibling 3 (choice E) is not the best choice of donors because the recipient
makes 8 times the proliferative response to his cells as to those of sibling 1.
38. Answer: D. If the child is developing hemolytic disease of the newborn,
then his erythrocytes will already be coated with maternal anti Rh antibod
ies. Adding Coombs serum (antihuman gammaglobulin) to the baby’s
RBCs then will cause agglutination. This is the direct Coombs test.
16
PART I | IMMUNOLOGY
Mother’s serum plus RhoGAM plus Coombs reagent (choice A) is not a set
of reagents that will accomplish any diagnosis. RhoGAM is anti RhD
immunoglobulin, which is given to Rh mothers at the termination of any
Rh+ pregnancy. If the mother is sensitized, she is making IgG antibodies of
the same specificity. Adding these 3 reagents together would tell you noth
ing of the baby’s condition.
Mother’s serum plus Rh RBCs plus Coombs reagent (choice B) is not a
set of reagents that will accomplish any diagnosis. If the mother is Rh , she
will not make a response to Rh RBCs, and addition of Coombs reagent
will accomplish nothing.
RhoGAM plus Rh+ RBCs from the baby (choice C) is not a set of reagents
that will accomplish any diagnosis. RhoGAM will bind to Rh+ RBCs from
the baby by definition, but adding these reagents together would tell you
nothing of the baby’s condition.
Rh+ RBCs plus mother’s serum plus Coombs (choice E) is the set of
reagents necessary for the performance of the indirect Coombs test. This is
a test used to determine if the mother is making IgG anti Rh antibodies,
which could cross the placenta and harm a fetus. The question asks about
the direct Coombs test, not the indirect.
39. Answer: D. The cell surface marker that would be useful to identify NK
cells is CD56. The cells that have the highest fluorescence with antibodies
to CD56 are found in quadrant D of panel 1.
Panel 1, quadrant A (choice A) contains the cells with maximum fluores
cence with antibodies to CD3. These would be T lymphocytes.
Panel 1, quadrant B (choice B) contains the cells double labeled with CD3
and CD56. Because CD3 is the pan T cell marker and CD56 is an NK cell
marker, there are no double labeled cells in this case.
Panel 1, quadrant C (choice C) contains the cells that have background
fluorescence with both CD3 and CD56. These are non T, non NK cells, so
they could be B lymphocytes or any other leukocyte.
Panel 2, quadrant A (choice E) contains the cells with maximum fluores
cence with antibodies to CD3. These are T lymphocytes.
Panel 2, quadrant B (choice F) contains double labeled cells, which
fluoresce with both antibody to CD3 and antibody to CD20. Because CD3
is a T cell marker and CD20 is a B cell marker, there are no cells in this
quadrant.
Panel 2, quadrant C (choice G) contains the cells with background fluores
cence with both antibodies to CD3 and CD20. These would be non B,
non T cells and would contain some NK cells, but other leukocytes would
be included here, so this is not the best choice.
Panel 2, quadrant D (choice H) contains the cells with maximum fluores
cence with antibody to CD20, which is a B cell marker.
16
IMMUNOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
40. Answer: D. Coombs reagent is antihuman IgG. It is necessary in the direct
and indirect Coombs tests because in those cases, one is looking for IgG
antibodies that could be transported across the placenta to harm an unborn
child. IgG is a much smaller molecule than IgM, and is not capable of
agglutinating erythrocytes without the addition of a “developing” antibody.
In the ABO blood typing test, the important isohemagglutinins are of the
IgM variety, capable of agglutinating erythrocytes by themselves because of
their sheer size.
The statement that all antibodies made in response to blood glycoproteins
are IgG (choice A) is not true because isohemagglutinins against ABO
blood group antigens are IgM.
The statement that complement mediated lysis is not important in ABO
incompatibilities (choice B) is not true because isohemagglutinins of the
IgM variety are extremely powerful activators of complement mediated
lysis. The agglutination tests here, however, do not use complement mediated
lysis as the indicator system.
That Coombs serum identifies only anti Rh antibodies (choice C) is not
true. Coombs serum is antihuman IgG. It will bind to the Fc portion of any
human IgG molecule, regardless of its antigenic specificity.
The statement that the high titer of natural isohemagglutinins makes
Coombs reagent unnecessary (choice E) is not true. It is the isotype of these
antibodies (IgM) and the size of that molecule that allows agglutination to
proceed without a developing antibody.
16

PART II
MICROBIOLOG

General Microbiology 1#
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Discuss the components of the Gram positive and Gram negative cell
envelopes and their role
❏ Describe the bacterial growth curve and what occurs at each stage of
growth
❏ Compare and contrast the mechanism of action and clinical symptoms
produced by the major bacterial toxins
❏ Describe bacterial cell wall synthesis and how antibiotics can inhibit
this process
BACTERIAL STRUCTURE
Both Gram positive and Gram negative cell envelopes have the following
properties:
• Cytoplasmic membranes, which contain transpeptidases and carboxypep
tidases that help construct the cell wall or peptidoglycan (they are also
known as penicillin binding proteins because they are targets for the
β lactam antibiotics)
• Peptidoglycan, a physical barrier to protect the cell
– Gram positives have a thick layer of peptidoglycan to protect cell from
osmotic damage
– Gram negatives have a very thin layer of peptidoglycan
– Gram stain reflects this difference
Gram positive bacteria may utilize teichoic acid for attachment or lipoteichoic
acid. Cell surface proteins are variable among the different genera but may include
proteins such as the M protein found within the genus Streptococcus.
Gram negative bacteria have an outer membrane covering the peptidoglycan. The
outer membrane contains the endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS).
• LPS is comprised of lipid A (the toxic portion), and polysaccharide.
• LPS binds specifically to receptors (LPS receptor, or TLR 4, see Immunol
ogy chapter 3) to activate macrophages.
• LPS can also non specifically activate B cells without the help of T cells.
• LPS can be serotyped to classify bacteria.
16
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Cell wall
teichoic acid Outer
membrane
protein LPS
O antigen
Membrane
lipoteichoic acid
Core
OM
Cell surface Envelop
proteins Lipid A
Porin
Peptidoglycan Lipoprotein
Peptidoglycan
Periplasmic space
Cytoplasmic
Cytoplasmic
membrane IM
membrane
Gram + Gram –
Cell wall synthesizing enzymes
(Penicillin Binding Proteins—PBPs)
Figure II 2 1. The Bacterial Cell Envelope
Figure II 1 1. Bacterial Cell Envelope
Peptidoglycan is comprised of polysaccharide chains N acetylglucosamine
(GlcNAc, NAG) and N acetylmuramic acid (MurNAc, NAM) that are crosslinked
by peptides. The peptide that crosslinks NAG and NAM is a tetrapeptide (begins
as a pentapeptide but terminal D alanine is released upon crosslinking to create
the tetrapeptide), in which the first 2 amino acids may vary among different
organisms.
NOTE The third amino acid in the peptide must include an amine group (e.g., L lysine,
diaminopimelic acid, diaminobutyric acid), which forms the cross link with the
The peptidoglycan is very thick in Gram
fourth peptide (D alanine from another chain).
positive cells, but very thin in Gram negative
cells. Synthesis of the peptidoglycan is a several step process.
• The NAG and NAM precursors are synthesized inside of the cell and the
pentapeptide is added.
NOTE
• At the cytoplasmic membrane, the individual units are attached to a
Carriers are colonized by a potential
carrier called bactoprenol.
pathogen but have no overt disease.
• The NAG is added and the unit (NAG NAM peptide) is translocated to
the outside of the cell.
• The individual unit is then added to the peptidoglycan chain through
transglycosylases, which use a pyrophosphate link between the unit and
the bactoprenol as energy to drive the reaction.
168
CHAPTER 1 | GENERAL MICROBIOLOGY
Lysozyme cleavage site
N acetyl N acetyl
glucosamine muramic acid
L alanine
D glutamate
L lysine NH2
for
cross linking
D alanine
Bond broken and
used for cross linking
Released on
D alanine
cross linking
Figure II 1 2. Synthesis of Peptidoglycan
The cross linking is catalyzed by transpeptidases and carboxypeptidases (remove
the terminal D alanines) that are also called penicillin binding proteins (PBP’s).
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Peptidoglycan synthesis is a major target for antimicrobial chemotherapy for
the following reasons:
• The process is utilized only in prokaryotes.
• Its inhibition has few side effects on eukaryotic cells (human cells).
As effective as antibiotics are, bacteria have become very clever at getting
around them and becoming resistant to antibiotics.
GlcNAc MurNAc GlcNAc MurNAc
L Ala L Al
D Ala
Glu N Glu
H H
Lys --------N: CO Lys ------ N CO
H H
D Ala D Ala D Ala D Ala
D Ala Lys D Ala Lys
Glu Glu
L Ala L Ala
MurNAc GlcNAc MurNAc GlcNAc
Figure II 1 3. Transpeptidation Reaction
169
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 1 1. Antibiotic MOA and Resistance Mechanisms
Antibiotic Effect on PG Synthesis Resistance Mechanisms
Bacitracin Interferes with recycling of
the pyrophosphobactopre
nol back to phosphobacto
prenol
β lactams Target the PBPs • Decreased binding of
antibiotic to the PBP
• Decreased concentra
tion of antibiotic at
target (Gram negative
only)
• β lactamases
Vancomycin Binds to D ala D ala to Van A and Van B genes
block the transpeptidation change the pentapeptide
reaction terminus so vancomycin
will no longer bind
An overview of the mechanism of action of antibiotics (covered in the Pharmacol
ogy Lecture Notes) can be seen below.
Cell wall synthesis
β Lactams
DNA replication
Vancomycin
Quinolones
Isoniazid
Metronidazole
Ethambutol
Clofazimine
Cycloserine
Ethionamide
RNA synthesis
Bacitracin
Rifampin
Polymyxin DNA
Rifabutin
Daptomycin
mRNA
Ribosomes
Protein synthesis
Antimetabolites
(50S ribosome)
Sulfonamides
Protein synthesis Chloramphenicol
Dapsone
Trimethoprim (30S ribosome) Macrolides
Clindamycin
Para aminosalicylic acid Aminoglycosides
Linezolid
Tetracyclines
Tigecyclines Quinupristin
dalfopristin
Telithromycin
Figure II 1 4. Antibiotic MOA
170
CHAPTER 1 | GENERAL MICROBIOLOGY
ENDOSPORES
Organisms: Bacillus and Clostridium
Function: survival not reproductive (1 bacterium → 1 spore); resistance to
chemicals, desiccation, radiation, freezing, and heat
Mechanism of resistance
• New enzymes (i.e., dipicolinic acid synthetase, heat resistant catalase)
• Increases or decreases in other enzymes
• Dehydration: calcium dipicolinate in core
• Keratin spore coat
1 Vegetative Cell NOTE
Reduced nutritional Spores of fungi have a reproductive role.
conditions produce
sporulation with loss
of vegetative cell.
1 Spore
Can survive adverse
conditions for years
Core
DNA
Ribosomes
Glycolytic
Enzymes
Cytoplasmic
membrane
Spore Wall
Normal
peptidoglycan
Cortex
Thick layer of
less cross linked
peptidoglycan Warm, moist, nutritious
conditions cause spore
Keratin Spore Coat to germinate.
Protein
1 Vegetative Cell
with loss of spore
Figure II 2 2. Endospore
Figure II 1 5. Endospore
17
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Recall Question
The endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is composed of which of
the following lipids?
A. Lipid A
B. Lipid B
C. Lipid C
D. Lipid D
Answer: A
BACTERIAL GROWTH AND DEATH
NOTE
Lag Phase
• Initial phase (only 1 lag phase)
• Detoxifying medium
• Turning on enzymes to utilize medium
1 Cell 2 Cells 4 Cells
• For the exam, number of cells at
beginning equals number of cells at Figure II 2 3. Exponential Growth by Binary Fission
Figure II 1 6. Exponential Growth by Binary Fission
end of lag phase
Log Phase
Stationary phase
• Rapid exponential growth
• Generation time = time it takes one
Cell Log phase
cell to divide into two; this is (logarithmic or
determined during log phase of exponential)
Death
Number
phase
Stationary Phase
• Nutrients used up Log
• Toxic products like acids and alkali
begin to accumulate
• Number of new cells equals the
Lag
number of dying cells
Time
Figure II 2 4. Bacterial Growth Curve
Figure II 1 7. Bacterial Growth Curve
Antibiotics are most effective at the logarithmic phase of the growth curve.
172
CHAPTER 1 | GENERAL MICROBIOLOGY
CULTURE OF MICROORGANISMS
Obligate intracellular pathogens (viruses, rickettsias, chlamydias, etc.) cannot be
cultured in vitro on artificial media. Therefore, tissue cultures (cell cultures), eggs,
animals are utilized for growth. Some pathogens cannot be cultured at all (e.g.,
syphilis).
Facultative intracellular or extracellular organisms can be grown on inert lab
media such as broth or agar. Selective media selects for certain bacteria by
inclusion of special nutrients and/or antibiotics. Differential media differentiates
bacteria by colony morphology or color.
Table II 1 2. Special Media for Selected Organisms
Organism Medium
Anaerobes Thioglycolate
Corynebacterium Löffler coagulated serum medium (S)
Tellurite agar (D)
Enteric bacteria Eosin methylene blue (D)
MacConkey (D and S)
Enteric pathogens Hektoen enteric agar (D)
Xylose lysine deoxycholate agar
Vibrio cholerae (likes TCBS (Thiosulfate Citrate Bile Salts
alkaline growth medium)
Sucrose agar) (S)
Legionella Charcoal yeast extract agar (CYE agar) (S)
Mycobacterium Löwenstein Jensen medium (S)
Neisseria from normally Chocolate agar
sterile sites, Haemophilus
Neisseria from sites with Thayer Martin selective medium* (S)
normal flora
*Thayer Martin media is a chocolate agar supplemented with vancomycin, nystatin and
colistin to inhibit the normal flora, including nonpathogenic Neisseria.
Table II 1 3. Miscellaneous Growth Requirements NOTE
Cholesterol and purines and pyrimidines Mycoplasma Mnemonic
Cysteine* Francisella, Brucella, The 4 sisters “Ella” worship in the “Cysteine”
Legionella, Pasteurella chapel:
X (protoporphyrin) and V (NAD) Haemophilus (influenzae
• Francisella
and aegyptius require both)
• Brucella
*The 4 Sisters Ella and the Cysteine Chapel
• Legionella
• Pasteurella
17
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Recall Question
Tetracyclines act on which of the following bacterial processes?
A. Cell wall synthesis
B. DNA replication
C. Protein synthesis 30S ribosome
D. Protein synthesis 50S ribosome
E. RNA synthesis
Answer: C
PATHOGENICITY (INFECTIVITY AND TOXICITY)
MAJOR MECHANISMS
Colonization
(Important unless organism is traumatically implanted.)
Adherence to cell surfaces involves
• Pili/fimbriae: primary mechanism in most gram negative cells.
• Teichoic acids: primary mechanism of gram positive cells.
• Adhesins: colonizing factor adhesins, pertussis toxin, and hemagglutinins.
Partial adherence to inert materials, biofilms: Staph. epidermidis, Streptococcus
mutans, Pseudomonas aeruginosa
NOTE Avoiding Immediate Destruction by Host Defense System
Mnemonic • Anti phagocytic surface components (inhibit phagocytic uptake):
Streptococcus pneumoniae – Capsules/slime layers:
Streptococcus pyogenes M protein
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Neisseria gonorrhoeae pili
Haemophilus influenzae
Staphylococcus aureus A protein
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
• IgA proteases, destruction of mucosal IgA: Neisseria, Haemophilus,
S. pneumoniae
Neisseria meningitidis
Cryptococcus neoformans
“Hunting and Gathering” Needed Nutrients
(Some Killers Have Pretty Nice Capsules)
– Siderophores steal (chelate) and import iron.
17
CHAPTER 1 | GENERAL MICROBIOLOGY
Antigenic Variation NOTE
• Changing surface antigens to avoid immune destruction Intracellular organisms
• N. gonorrhoeae: pili and outer membrane proteins
• Elicit different immune responses
• Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense and T. b. gambiense: phase variation
• Different pathology
• Enterobacteriaceae: capsular and flagellar antigens may or may not be
expressed • Different antibiotics
• HIV, influenza: antigenic drift • Different culture techniques
Ability to Survive Intracellularly
• Evading intracellular killing by professional phagocytic cells allows
intracellular growth:
– M. tuberculosis survives by inhibiting phagosome lysosome fusion.
– Listeria quickly escapes the phagosome into the cytoplasm before
phagosome lysosome fusion.
• Invasins: surface proteins that allow an organism to bind to and invade
normally non phagocytic human cells, escaping the immune system. Best
studied invasin is on Yersinia pseudotuberculosis (an organism causing
diarrhea).
• Damage from viruses is largely from intracellular replication, which either
kills cells, transforms them or, in the case of latent viruses, may cause no
noticeable damage.
Type III Secretion Systems
• Tunnel from the bacteria to the host cell (macrophage) that delivers
bacterial toxins directly to the host cell
• Have been demonstrated in many pathogens: E. coli, Salmonella species,
Yersinia species, P. aeruginosa, and Chlamydia
Inflammation or Immune Mediated Damage
Examples include:
• Cross reaction of bacteria induced antibodies with tissue antigens
causes disease (e.g., rheumatic fever).
• Delayed hypersensitivity and the granulomatous response stimulated by
the presence of intracellular bacteria is responsible for neurological
damage in leprosy, cavitation in tuberculosis, and fallopian tube blockage
resulting in infertility from Chlamydia PID (pelvic inflammatory disease).
• Immune complexes damage the kidney in post streptococcal acute
glomerulonephritis.
• Peptidoglycan teichoic acid (large fragments) of gram positive cells:
– Serves as a structural toxin released when cells die.
– Chemotactic for neutrophils.
17
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Physical Damage
• Swelling from infection in a fixed space damages tissues; examples:
meningitis and cysticercosis.
• Large physical size of organism may cause problems (e.g., Ascaris
lumbricoides blocking bile duct).
TOXINS
Toxins may aid in invasiveness, damage cells, inhibit cellular processes, or trigger
immune response and damage.
Structural Toxins
• Endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide = LPS)
– LPS is part of gram negative outer membrane
– Toxic portion is lipid A: generally not released (and toxic) until death
of cell (exception: N. meningitidis, which overproduces outer membrane
fragments)
– LPS is heat stable and not strongly immunogenic, so cannot be con
verted to a toxoid
– LPS is primary virulence factor in Gram negative septic shock
– Mechanism: LPS activates macrophages, leading to release of TNF
alpha, IL 1, and IL 6. IL 1 is a major mediator of fever. Macrophage acti
vation and products lead to tissue damage. Damage to the endothelium
from bradykinin induced vasodilation leads to shock. Coagulation
(DIC) is mediated through the activation of Hageman factor.
• Peptidoglycan, teichoic acids
Exotoxins
• Are protein toxins, generally quite toxic and secreted by bacterial cells
(some gram +, some gram -)
• Can be modified by chemicals or heat to produce a toxoid that still is
immunogenic, but no longer toxic so can be used as a vaccine
• A B (or “two”) component protein toxins
– B component binds to specific cell receptors to facilitate the internaliza
tion of A.
– A component is the active (toxic) component (often an enzyme such as
an ADP ribosyl transferase).
– Exotoxins may be subclassed as enterotoxins, neurotoxins, or cytotoxins.
• Cytolysins: lyse cells from outside by damaging membrane.
– C. perfringens alpha toxin is a lecithinase.
– Staphylococcus aureus alpha toxin inserts itself to form pores in the
membrane.
17
CHAPTER 1 | GENERAL MICROBIOLOGY
Table II 1 4. Major Exotoxins
Organism (Gram) Toxin Mode of Action Role in Disease
Inhibitors of Corynebacterium Diphtheria ADP ribosyl transferase; Inhibits eukaryotic cell protein
Protein diphtheriae (+) toxin inactivates eEF 2; synthesis
Synthesis 1 ́ targets: heart/
nerves/epithelium
Pseudomonas Exotoxin A ADP ribosyl transferase; Inhibits eukaryotic cell protein
aeruginosa ( ) inactivates eEF 2; synthesis
1 ́ target: liver
Shigella Shiga toxin Interferes with 60S Inhibits protein synthesis in
dysenteriae ( ) ribosomal subunit eukaryotic cells. Enterotoxic,
cytotoxic, and neurotoxic
Enterohemorrhagic Verotoxin (a Interferes with 60S Inhibits protein synthesis in
E. coli (EHEC) ( ) Shiga like ribosomal subunit eukaryotic cells
toxin)
Neurotoxins Clostridium tetani Tetanus toxin Blocks release of the Inhibits neurotransmission in
(+) inhibitory transmitters inhibitory synapses
glycine and GABA
Clostridium Botulinum Blocks release of Inhibits cholinergic synapses
botulinum (+) toxin acetylcholine
Super Staphylococcus TSST 1 Superantigen Fever, increased susceptibility
antigens aureus (+) to LPS, rash, shock, capillary
leakage
Streptococcus Exotoxin A, Similar to TSST 1 Fever, increased susceptibility
pyogenes (+) a.k.a.: to LPS, rash, shock, capillary
erythrogenic leakage, cardiotoxicity
or pyrogenic
toxin
cAMP Enterotoxigenic Heat labile LT stimulates an adenyl Both LT and ST promote
inducers Escherichia coli ( ) toxin (LT) ate cyclase by ADP secretion of fluid and electro
ribosylation of GTP lytes from intestinal epithelium
binding protein
Vibrio cholerae ( ) Cholera toxin Similar to E. coli LT Profuse, watery diarrhea
Bacillus anthracis Anthrax toxin EF = edema factor = Decreases phagocytosis;
(+) (3 proteins adenylate cyclase causes edema, kills cells
make 2
LF = lethal factor
toxins)
PA = protective antigen
(B component for both)
Bordetella Pertussis ADP ribosylates Gi, the Histamine sensitizing
pertussis ( ) toxin negative regulator of Lymphocytosis promoting
adenylate cyclase → Islet activating
increased cAMP
Cytolysins Clostridium Alpha toxin Lecithinase Damages cell membranes;
perfringens (+) myonecrosis
Staphylococcus Alpha toxin Toxin intercalates Cell membrane becomes leaky
aureus (+) forming pores
17
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Recall Question
Antigenic variation on N. gonorrhoeae occurs as a result of changes
in which of the following structures?
A. Capsule
B. Capsular and flagellar antigens
C. Lipopolysaccharide
D. Pilli and outer membrane proteins
Answer: D
17
Medically Relevant Bacteria 2#
LEARNING OBJECTIVES NOTE
Nomenclature
❏ Differentiate between bacterial pathogens based on lab test, including
Gram stain reaction, biochemical tests, and culture Latin bacterial family names have “ aceae,”
e.g., Enterobacteriaceae.
❏ Discuss the pathogenic role and mechanism by which bacterial viru
Genus and species names are italicized
lence factors contribute to clinical disease
and abbreviated, e.g., Enterobacter
❏ Describe acquisition of each bacterial infection, including endogenous aerogenes = E. aerogenes.
infections produced by normal flora, autoinfections, and sources of
exogenous infections
NORMAL FLORA
Normal flora are found on body surfaces contiguous with the outside environment. NOTE
They are semi permanent, varying with major life changes.
Bacteremia is bacteria in the bloodstream
• Can cause endogenous infection without overt clinical signs, while septicemia
is bacteria in the bloodstream (multiplying)
– If misplaced, e.g., fecal flora to urinary tract or skin flora to catheter
with clinical symptoms.
– If person becomes compromised, normal flora may overgrow
(oral thrush)
• Can contribute to health
– Protective host defense by maintaining conditions such as pH so other
organisms may not grow
– Serve nutritional function by synthesizing: K and B vitamins
– Competition for space
17
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 2 1. Important Normal Flora
Common or Medically Relevant
Site Organisms Less Common but Notable Organisms
Blood, internal organs None, generally sterile
Cutaneous surfaces Staphylococcus epidermidis Staphylococcus aureus, Corynebacteria (diphthe
including urethra and roids), streptococci, anaerobes, e.g., peptostrep
outer ear tococci, yeasts (Candida spp.)
Nose Staphylococcus aureus S. epidermidis, diphtheroids, assorted strepto
cocci
Oropharynx Viridans streptococci including Assorted streptococci, nonpathogenic Neisseria,
Strep. mutans1 nontypeable2 Haemophilus influenzae, Candida
albicans
Gingival crevices Anaerobes: Bacteroides, Prevotella,
Fusobacterium, Streptococcus,
Actinomyces
Stomach None
Colon (microaerophilic/ Babies; breast fed only: Lactobacillus, streptococci
anaerobic) Bifidobacterium
Adult: Eubacterium, Fusobacterium, Lactobacillus,
assorted Gram negative anaerobic rods,
Bacteroides/ Prevotella
Enterococcus faecalis and other streptococci
(Predominant organism) Escherichia
Bifidobacterium
Vagina Lactobacillus3 Assorted streptococci, gram negative rods,
diphtheroids, yeasts, Veillonella
1S. mutans secretes a biofilm that glues it and other oral flora to teeth, producing dental plaque.
2Nontypeable for Haemophilus means no capsule.
3Group B streptococci colonize vagina of 15–20% of women and may infect the infant during labor or delivery, causing septicemia and/or
meningitis (as may E. coli from fecal flora).
Table II 2 2. Oxygen Requirements and Toxicity
Classification Characteristics Important Genera
Obligate aerobes Require oxygen Mycobacterium
Have no fermentative pathways Pseudomonas
Generally produce superoxide dismutase Bacillus
Microaerophilic Require low but not full oxygen tension Campylobacter
Helicobacter
Facultative anaerobes Will respire aerobically until oxygen is depleted Most bacteria,
and then ferment
e.g., Enterobacteriaceae
Obligate anaerobes • Lack superoxide dismutase Actinomyces*
• Generally lack catalase Bacteroides
• Are fermenters Clostridiu
• Cannot use O2 as terminal electron acceptor
*ABCs of anaerobes = Actinomyces, Bacteroides, and Clostridium
180
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
STAINS
Table II 2 3. Gram Stain
Reagent Gram Positive Gram Negative
Crystal violet (a very intense Purple/Blue Purple/Blue
purple, small dye molecule)
Purple/Blue (a Purple/Blue (a
large dye complex) large dye complex)
Acetone or Alcohol Purple/Blue Colorless
(a pale dye) Purple/Blue Red/Pink
All cocci are gram positive except Neisseria, Moraxella and Veillonella.
All spore formers are gram positive.
Background in stain modified for tissues will be pale red.
Table II 2 4. Ziehl Neelsen Acid Fast Stain (or Kinyoun)
Reagent Acid Fast Non Acid Fast*
Carbol Fuchsin with heat** Red (Hot Pink) Red (Hot Pink)
Acid Alcohol Red Colorless
Methylene Blue*** Red Blue
*Mycobacterium is acid fast. Nocardia is partially acid fast. All other bacteria are non acid
fast. Three protozoan parasites (Cryptosporidium, Cystoisospora, and Cyclospora) have acid
fast oocysts
**Without the heat, the dye would not go in the mycobacterial cells.
***Sputa and human cells will be blue.
GRAM STAINING REACTIONS
Table II 2 5. Gram Positive Bacteria
Cocci
Staphylococcus**
Streptococcus**
Enterococcus
Rods
Aerobic or facultative anaerobic
Bacillus**
Listeria*
Corynebacterium*
Nocardia
Mycobacterium**
Anaerobic
Actinomyces
Clostridium**
Cutibacterium
Lactobacillus
Note: Spore formers are Bacillus and Clostridium
181
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 2 6. Gram Negative Bacteria
Cocci
Neisseria**
Moraxella
Rods
Pseudomonas** Legionella*
Burkholderia Brucella
Acinetobacter Bordetella*
* High yield organisms
Eikenella Francisella*
** Extremely high yield organisms
Kingella Capnocytophaga
Haemophilus** Pasteurella*
Bartonella
Curved or helical
Campylobacter**
Helicobacter**
Vibrio**
Enterobacteriaceae
Escherichia** Yersinia**
Shigella** Aeromonas
Salmonella** Serratia
Klebsiella* Citrobacter
Proteus* Enterobacter
Anaerobic rods
Bacteroides Porphyromonas
Prevotella Fusobacterium
Gram variable rods
Gardnerella Mobiluncus
Spirochetes
Treponema**
Borrelia**
Leptospira
18
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
Table II 2 7. Non Gram–staining Bacteria*
Mycoplasmataceae
Mycoplasma**
Ureaplasma
Rickettsiaceae
Rickettsia*
Ehrlichia
Coxiella
Chlamydiaceae
Chlamydia**
Chlamydophila
*Note:
Poorly visible on traditional Gram stain: Mycobacterium does not stain well with the
Gram stain due to its waxy cell wall. It is considered gram positive.
Most spirochetes, chlamydiae, and rickettsias are so thin that the color of the Gram
stain cannot be seen. All have gram negative cell walls.
Legionella (gram negative) also does not stain well with the traditional Gram stain
unless counterstain time is increased.
Recall Question
Staphylococcus aureus is commonly found in which part of the
body?
A. Colon
B. Cutaneous surfaces
C. Gingival crevices
D. Nose
E. Oropharynx
Answer: D
18
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
GRAM POSITIVE COCCI
• Staphylococcus
• Streptococcus
• Enterococcus
Table II 2 8. Major Species of Staphylococcus and Streptococcus and Identifying Features*
Distinguishing
Catalase Coagulase Hemolysis† Features Disease Presentations
Staphylococcus Species
S. aureus + + β Ferments Infective endocarditis (acute)
mannitol
Abscesses
Salt tolerant
Toxic shock syndrome
Gastroenteritis
Suppurative lesions, pyoderma,
impetigo
Osteomyelitis
S. epidermidis + - γ NovobiocinS Endocarditis in IV drug users
Biofilm Catheter and prosthetic device
producer infections
S. saprophyti + - γ NovobiocinR UTIs in newly sexually active
cus females
Streptococcus Species (Grouped by analysis of C carbohydrate)
S. pyogenes - - β BacitracinS Pharyngitis
(Group A) PYR† Scarlet fever
Pyoderma/impetigo
Suppurative lesions
Rheumatic fever
Acute glomerulonephritis
S. agalactiae - - β BacitracinR Neonatal septicemia and meningitis
(Group B) CAMP+
S. pneumoniae - - α OptochinS Pneumonia (community acquired)
(not groupable) Bile soluble Adult meningitis
Otitis media and sinusitis in children
Viridans group - - α/γ OptochinR Infective endocarditis
(not groupable) Bile insoluble Dental caries
† β hemolysis = clear; α hemolysis = partial; γ hemolysis = no hemolysis
PYR, pyrrolidonyl arylamidase; S, sensitive; R, resistant
*Many of the diseases caused by Staphylococcus and Streptococcus are similar (i.e., skin infections, endocarditis), so lab tests are very
important to differentiate between these organisms.
18
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
Gram positive Cocci
+ Catalase −
Staphylococci Streptococci/Enterococci
+ Coagulase − Hemolysis
S. aureus CoNS α β γ
S
R Novobiocin S Enterococci
R Bacitracin S
S. saprophyticus S. epidermidis
S. agalactiae S. pyogenes
Optochin,
R bile S
Viridans Strep S. pneumonia
Some Enterococci
Figure II 2 1. Differentiation of Gram Positive Cocci
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
GENUS: STAPHYLOCOCCUS S. epidermidis
• Coagulase ( ); gram (+) cocci
Genus Features
• Novobiocin sensitive
• Gram positive cocci in clusters
• Infections of catheters/shunts
• Catalase positive (streptococci are catalase negative)
S. saprophyticus
Species of Medical Importance • Coagulase ( ), gram (+) cocci
• S. aureus
• Novobiocin resistant
• S. epidermidis
• S. saprophyticus
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Staphylococcus aureus
Staphylococcus aureus
• Coagulase (+), gram (+) cocci in
clusters
Distinguishing Features
• Small, yellow colonies on blood agar • Gastroenteritis: 2−6 h onset, salty
foods, custards
• β hemolytic
• Coagulase positive (all other Staphylococcus species negative) • Endocarditis: acute
• Ferments mannitol on mannitol salt agar • Toxic shock syndrome: desquamating
Reservoir: normal flora (nasal mucosa [25% of population are carriers] and skin) rash, fever, hypotension
• Impetigo: bullous
• Pneumonia: nosocomial, typical, acute
• Osteomyelitis: #1 cause unless HbS
mentioned
185
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Transmission
• Hands
• Sneezing
• Surgical wounds
• Contaminated food: custard pastries; potato salad; canned meats
Predisposing Factors for Infection
• Surgery/wounds
• Foreign body (tampons, surgical packing, sutures)
• Severe neutropenia (<500/μL)
• Intravenous drug abuse
• Chronic granulomatous disease
• Cystic fibrosis
Pathogenesis
• Protein A binds Fc component of IgG, inhibits phagocytosis
• Enterotoxins: fast acting, heat stable
• Toxic shock syndrome toxin 1 (TSST 1): superantigen (see Immunology,
chapter 6)
• Coagulase: converts fibrinogen to fibrin clot
• Cytolytic toxin (α toxin): pore forming toxin, Panton Valentine leukocidin
(PVL), forms pores in infected cells and is acquired by bacteriophage;
associated with increased virulence, MRSA strains
• Exfoliatins: skin exfoliating toxins (involved in scalded skin syndrome
[SSS]) and bullous impetigo
18
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
Diseases
Table II 2 9. Staphylococcus aureus
Diseases Clinical Symptoms Pathogenicity Factors
Gastroenteritis (food poisoning) 2–6 hours after ingesting toxin: Enterotoxins A–E preformed in food
—toxin ingested preformed in nausea, abdominal pain, vomiting,
food followed by diarrhea
Infective endocarditis (acute) Fever, malaise, leukocytosis, heart mur Fibrin platelet mesh, cytolytic toxins
(most common cause) mur (may be absent initially)
Abscesses and mastitis Subcutaneous tenderness, redness Coagulase, cytolysins
and swelling; hot
Toxic shock syndrome Fever, hypotension, scarlatiniform rash TSST 1
that desquamates (particularly on
palms and soles), multiorgan failure
Impetigo Erythematous papules to bullae Coagulase, exfoliatins
Scalded skin syndrome Diffuse epidermal peeling Coagulase, exfoliatins
Pneumonia Productive pneumonia with rapid Coagulase, cytolysins
onset, high rate of necrosis, and
high fatality; nosocomial, ventilator,
postinfluenza, IV drug abuse, cystic
fibrosis, chronic granulomatous
disease, etc.; salmon colored sputum
Surgical infections Fever with cellulitis and/or abscesses Coagulase, exfoliatins, ± TSSTs
Osteomyelitis (most common Bone pain, fever, ± tissue swelling, Cytolysins, coagulase
cause) redness; lytic bone lesions on imaging
Septic arthritis Monoarticular joint pain; inflammation Cytolysins, coagulase
Treatment
• Nafcillin/oxacillin (drugs of choice because of widespread penicillinase
producing stains)
• Mupirocin (for topical treatment)
• Gastroenteritis is self limiting.
• Vancomycin for methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA); quinu
pristin/dalfopristin for vancomycin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (VRSA)
or vancomycin intermediate S. aureus (VISA)
18
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
GENUS: STREPTOCOCCUS
Genus Features
• Gram positive cocci in chains
• Catalase negative
• Serogrouped using known antibodies to the cell wall carbohydrates
(Lancefield groups A–O): S. pneumoniae serotyped via capsule; S. pyogenes
serotyped via M protein
Species of Medical Importance
• S. pyogenes
• S. agalactiae (group B streptococci; GBS)
• S. pneumoniae
• Viridans streptococci: S. mutans; S. sanguinis; S. gallolyticus (bovis)
Streptococcus pyogenes (Group A Streptococcus; GAS)
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Distinguishing Features
Group A Streptococcus
• β hemolytic
• Catalase ( ), β hemolytic, bacitracin • Bacitracin sensitive
sensitive, gram (+) cocci
• Pyrrolidonyl arylamidase (PYR) positive
• Pharyngitis: abrupt onset, tonsillar
Reservoir: human throat; skin
abscesses
Transmission: direct contact; respiratory droplets
• Scarlet fever: blanching, sandpaper
rash, strawberry tongue
Pathogenesis
• Impetigo: honey crusted lesions • Hyaluronic acid: is non immunogenic
• M protein: antiphagocytic, associated with acute glomerulonephritis,
rheumatic fever
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
• Streptolysin O: immunogenic, hemolysin/cytolysin
• Rheumatic fever: after streptococcal
• Streptolysin S: not immunogenic, hemolysin/cytolysin
pharyngitis, ↑ ASO titer
Spreading Factors
• AGN: after streptococcal skin or throat
infection, hypertension, edema, smoky • Streptokinase: breaks down fibrin clot
urine • Streptococcal DNAse: liquefies pus, extension of lesion
• Hyaluronidase: hydrolyzes the ground substances of the connective tissues
• Exotoxins A–C (pyrogenic or erythrogenic exotoxins)
– Phage coded (i.e., the cells are lysogenized by a phage)
– Cause fever and rash of scarlet fever: superantigens
18
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
Diseases
Table II 2 10. Acute Suppurative Group A Streptococcal Infections*
Diseases Symptoms
Pharyngitis Abrupt onset of sore throat, fever, malaise, and
headache; tonsillar abscesses and tender
anterior cervical lymph nodes
Scarlet fever Above followed by a blanching “sandpaper”
rash (palms and soles are usually spared),
circumoral pallor, strawberry tongue, and
nausea/vomiting
Pyoderma/Impetigo Pyogenic skin infection (honey crusted lesions)
*Also, cellulitis/necrotizing fasciitis, puerperal fever, lymphangitis, erysipelas
Table II 2 11. Nonsuppurative Sequelae to Group A Streptococcal Infections
Disease Sequelae of Mechanisms/Symptoms
Rheumatic fever Pharyngitis with Antibodies to heart tissue/2
group A strep weeks post pharyngitis, fever,
joint inflammation, carditis,
erythema marginatum (chorea
later) type II hypersensitivity
Acute Pharyngitis or Immune complexes bound to
glomerulonephritis skin infection glomeruli/pulmonary edema and
hypertension, “smoky” urine
(AGN)
(type III hypersensitivity)
Recall Question
What is a predisposing factor for Staphylococcus aureus infection?
A. Chronic kidney disease
B. Congestive cardiac disease
C. Severe neutropenia
D. Hereditary angioedema
E. Pseudomembranous colitis
Answer: C
18
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Diagnosis
• Rapid strep test (ELISA based) misses approximately 25% of infections (all
negatives should be cultured)
• Antibodies to streptolysin O (ASO) titer >200 IU is significant for rheu
matic fever
• Anti DNAse B and antihyaluronidase titers for AGN
Treatment: beta lactams; macrolides if penicillin allergy
Prevention: possible prophylactic antibiotics for at least 5 years post acute
rheumatic fever; beta lactams and macrolides
Streptococcus agalactiae (Group B Streptococci; GBS)
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES Distinguishing Features
S. agalactiae • β hemolytic
• Bacitracin resistant
• Gram (+), catalase ( ), β hemolytic,
bacitracin resistant, CAMP test (+) • Hydrolyze hippurate
• CAMP test positive (CAMP factor is a polypeptide which “complements”
• Neonatal meningitis and septicemia:
the sphingomyelinase of S. aureus to create an enhanced hemolytic pattern
#1 cause, especially in prolonged
in shape of an arrowhead)
labors
Reservoir: human vagina (15−20% of women); GI tract
Transmission: newborn infected during birth (increased risk with prolonged
labor after rupture of membranes)
Pathogenesis: capsule; β hemolysin and CAMP factor
Diseases: neonatal septicemia and meningitis; most common causal agent
Treatment: penicillin or ampicillin with an aminoglycoside or a cephalosporin;
clindamycin or erythromycin for penicillin allergy
Prevention: prophylaxis during delivery in women with positive vaginal/rectal
culture of GBS; history of recent infection with GBS; or prolonged labors after
membrane rupture
19
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Distinguishing Features
• α hemolytic
• Optochin sensitive
• Lancet shaped diplococci
• Lysed by bile (bile soluble)
Reservoir: human upper respiratory tract Figure II 2 5. Streptococcus
Streptococcus pneumoniae
pneumoniae
Transmission: respiratory droplets (not considered highly communicable; often
colonize the nasopharynx without causing disease)
Predisposing Factors KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
• Antecedent influenza or measles infection Streptococcus pneumoniae
• Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
• Gram (+), catalase ( ), α hemolytic,
• Congestive heart failure (CHF) soluble in bile, optochin sensitive
• Alcoholism
• Pneumonia—typical, most common
• Asplenia predisposes to septicemia cause, rusty sputum
• Meningitis—many PMNs, ↓ glucose,
Pathogenesis ↑ protein in CSF, most common adult
• Polysaccharide capsule is the major virulence factor cause
• IgA protease
• Otitis media and sinusitis—most
• Teichoic acid common cause
• Pneumolysin O: hemolysin/cytolysin: damages respiratory epithelium;
inhibits leukocyte respiratory burst and inhibits classical complement fixation
Diseases NOTE
• Typical pneumonia: most common cause (especially in decade 6 of life); Typical Pneumonia
shaking chills, high fever, lobar consolidation, blood tinged, “rusty”
Bacterial pneumonia such as Streptococcus
sputum
pneumoniae elicits neutrophils; arachidonic
• Adult meningitis: most common cause; peptidoglycan and teichoic acids
acid metabolites (acute inflammatory
are highly inflammatory in CNS; CSF reveals high WBCs (neutrophils)
and low glucose, high protein mediators) cause pain and fever.
Pneumococcus produces a lobar pneumonia
• Otitis media and sinusitis in children most common cause
with a productive cough, grows on blood
agar, and usually responds well to penicillin
Diagnosis
treatment.
• Gram stain and culture of CSF or sputum
• Quellung reaction: positive (swelling of the capsule with the addition of
type specific antiserum, no longer used but still seen on the exam)
• Latex particle agglutination: test for capsular antigen in CSF
• Urinary antigen test
19
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Treatment: beta lactams for bacterial pneumonia; ceftriaxone or cefotaxime for
adult meningitis (add vancomycin if penicillin resistant S. pneumoniae has been
reported in community); amoxicillin for otitis media and sinusitis in children
(erythromycin in cases of allergy)
Prevention
• Antibody to capsule (>80 capsular serotypes) provides type specific
immunity
• Vaccine
– Pediatric (PCV, pneumococcal conjugate vaccine): 13 of most common
serotypes; conjugated to diphtheria toxoid; prevents invasive disease
– Adult (PPV, pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine): 23 of most common
capsular serotypes; recommended for all age ≥65 plus those at risk
Viridans Streptococci (S. sanguis, S. mutans)
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES Distinguishing Features
Viridans Streptococci • α hemolytic
• Optochin resistant
• Gram (+), catalase ( ), α hemolytic,
optochin resistant, bile insoluble • PYR negative
• Bile insoluble
• Plaque and dental caries
Reservoir: normal flora of human oropharynx (S. mutans, S. sanguinis), human
• Subacute bacterial
colon (S. gallolyticus)
damage entodocharedairttis—preveaxlvisetsi;ng
follows dental work Transmission: endogenous
Pathogenesis: dextran (biofilm) mediated adherence onto tooth enamel or
damaged heart valve and to each other (vegetation); growth in vegetation protects
organism from immune system
Diseases
• Dental caries: S. mutans dextran mediated adherence glues oral flora onto
teeth, forming plaque and causing dental caries
• Infective endocarditis (subacute)
– Malaise, fatigue, anorexia, night sweats, weight loss, splinter hemorrhages
– Predisposing conditions: damaged (or prosthetic) heart valve and dental
work without prophylactic antibiotics or extremely poor oral hygiene
– S. gallolyticus associated with colon cancer
Treatment: penicillin G with aminoglycosides for endocarditis
Prevention: prophylactic antibiotics prior to dental work for individuals with
damaged heart valve
19
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
GENUS: ENTEROCOCCUS
Genus Features
• Catalase negative
• PYR+
Species of Medical Importance
• Enterococcus faecalis
• Enterococcus faecium
Enterococcus faecalis/faecium KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Enterococcus faecalis/faecium
Distinguishing Features
• Gram (+), catalase ( ), variable
• Group D gram positive cocci in chains
hemolysis, hydrolyzes esculin
• PYR test positive
• Urinary/biliary tract
• Catalase negative, varied hemolysis
males infections—elderly
• Hydrolyze esculin in 40% bile and 6.5% NaCl (bile esculin agar turns
• Subacute bacterial
black)
males, follows endoGcIa/rGdiUtis—eldseurrlgyery,
Reservoir: human colon, urethra ± and female genital tract
preexisting heart valve damage
Transmission: endogenous
Pathogenesis
• Bile/salt tolerance allows survival in bowel and gall bladder.
• During medical procedures on GI or GU tract: E. faecalis → bloodstream
→ previously damaged heart valves → endocarditis
Diseases: urinary and biliary tract infection; infective (subacute) endocarditis in
persons (often elderly) with damaged heart valves
Diagnosis: culture on blood agar; antibiotic sensitivities
Treatment: all strains carry some drug resistance
• Some vancomycin resistant strains of Enterococcus faecium or E. faecalis
have no reliably effective treatment; or low level resistance use ampicillin,
gentamicin, or streptomycin
• VanA strains have UDP N acetylmuramyl pentapeptide with terminal
d alanyl d alanine replaced with d alanyl d lactate, which functions in cell
wall synthesis but does not bind to vancomycin
Prevention: for those with damaged heat valves, penicillin and gentamicin
prophylaxis prior to intestinal or urinary tract manipulation
19
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
GRAM POSITIVE RODS
Table II 2 12. Gram Positive Rods
Aerobic Facultative Branch
Genus Spore Growth Exotoxin Intracellular Acid Fast ing Rods
Bacillus + + + - - -
Clostridium + - + - - -
Listeria - + - + - -
Corynebacterium - + + - - -
Actinomyces - - - - - +
Nocardia - + - - +† +
Mycobacterium - + - + + -
†Nocardia is considered partially acid fast.
Recall Question
Which of the following is a distinguishing feature of Streptococcus
pneumonia?
A. Beta hemolytic
B. Cluster of cocci
C. Not lysed by bile
D. Optochin sensitive
Answer: D
GENUS: BACILLUS
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES Bacillus anthracis
Bacillus anthracis
Distinguishing Features
• Gram (+), spore forming, aerobic rods
• Large, boxcar like, gram positive, spore forming rods
• Contact with animal hides or
• Capsule is polypeptide (poly d glutamate)
bioterrorism; eschar or life threatening
• Potential bioterrorism agent
pneumonia
Reservoir: animals, skins, soils
Transmission: contact with infected animals or inhalation of spores (bioterrorism)
19
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
Pathogenesis
• Capsule polypeptide, antiphagocytic, immunogenic
• Anthrax toxin includes 3 protein components:
– Protective antigen (B component) mediates anthrax toxin entry of LF or
EF into eukaryotic cells
– LF kills cells
– EF is an adenylate cyclase (calmodulin activated like pertussis adenylate
cyclase)
Diseases
• Cutaneous anthrax: papule → papule with vesicles (malignant pustules)
→ central necrosis (eschar) with erythematous border often with painful
regional lymphadenopathy; fever in 50%
• Pulmonary (woolsorter’s disease): life threatening pneumonia; cough,
fever, malaise, and ultimately facial edema, dyspnea, diaphoresis, cyanosis,
and shock with mediastinal hemorrhagic lymphadenitis
• GI anthrax (rare): edema and blockage of GI tract can occur, vomiting and
bloody diarrhea, high mortality
Diagnosis: mediastinal widening on chest x ray; Gram stain and culture of blood/
respiratory secretions/lesions; serology; and PCR
Treatment: ciprofloxacin or doxycycline (genes encoding resistance to penicillin
and doxycycline have been transferred to B. anthracis)
Prevention: toxoid vaccine (AVA, acellular vaccine adsorbed) is given to those in
high risk occupations such as military; raxibacumab for prophylaxis
Bacillus cereus
Distinguishing Feature: spores KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Bacillus cereus
Reservoir: found in nature
• Rapid onset gastroenteritis
Transmission
• Fried rice in restaurants
• Foodborne, intoxication
• Major association with fried rice and other foods kept warm (i.e., not suf
ficiently hot) in buffet restaurants
Pathogenesis: 2 possible toxins
• Emetic toxin: preformed fast (1–6 hours), similar to S. aureus with vomiting
and diarrhea; sassociated with fried rice
• Diarrheal toxin produced in vivo (meats, sauces): 18 hours, similar to E. coli;
LT: increasing cAMP → watery diarrhea
Diseases: gastroenteritis (nonbloody, ± vomiting); eye infection (rare)
Diagnosis: clinical grounds; culture and Gram stain of implicated food
Treatment: self limiting; vancomycin for eye infection
19
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
GENUS: CLOSTRIDIUM
Species of Medical Importance
• Clostridium tetani
• Clostridium botulinum
• Clostridium perfringens
• Clostridium septicum
• Clostridium difficile
Clostridium tetani
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES Distinguishing Features: large gram positive, spore forming rods; anaerobes;
produces tetanus toxin
Clostridium tetani
Reservoir: soil
• Dirty puncture wound
Transmission: puncture wounds/trauma (human bites); requires low tissue
• Rigid paralysis
oxygenation (Eh)
Pathogenesis
• Spores germinate in tissues, producing tetanus toxin (an exotoxin also
called tetanospasmin)
• Carried intra axonally to CNS
• Binds to ganglioside receptors
• Blocks release of inhibitory mediators (glycine and GABA) at
spinal synapses
• Excitatory neurons are unopposed (can cause extreme muscle spasm)
• One of the most toxic substances known
Disease: tetanus
• Risus sardonicus
• Opisthotonos
• Extreme muscle spasms
• Drooling, hydrophobia
Diagnosis: primarily a clinical diagnosis; organism rarely isolated
Treatment: hyperimmune human globulin (TIG) to neutralize toxin plus metroni
dazole or penicillin; spasmolytic drugs (diazepam); debride; delay closure
Prevention: toxoid is a formaldehyde inactivated toxin (important because
disinfectants have poor sporicidal action); wound care (proper cleansing, care, and
treatment)
19
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
Table II 2 13. Wound Management
Patient Not Tetanus Prone Tetanus Prone
Linear, 1 cm deep cut, Blunt/missile, burn,
without devitalized frostbite, 1 cm deep;
tissue, without major devitalized tissue
contaminants, <6 present + contami
hours old nants (e.g., dirt,
saliva); any wound 6
hours old
Not completed Vaccine Vaccine and tetanus
primary or vaccination immunoglobulin
history unknown (human)
Completed primary Vaccine if >10 years Vaccine if >5 years
series
since last booster since last booster
Clostridium botulinum KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Clostridium botulinum
Distinguishing Features
• Home canned alkaline vegetables
• Anaerobic
• Floppy baby syndrome (infant with
• Gram positive spore forming rods
flaccid paralysis)
Reservoir: soil/dust
• Reversible flaccid paralysis
Transmission: foodborne/traumatic implantation
Pathogenesis
• Spores survive in soil and dust; germinate in moist, warm, nutritious but
nonacidic and anaerobic conditions
• Botulinum toxin
– A B polypeptide neurotoxin (actually a series of 7 antigenically differ
ent; type A and B most common)
– Coded for by a prophage (lysogenized Clostridium botulinum)
– Highly toxic
– Heat labile (unlike Staph), 10 minutes 60.0 C
– Mechanism of action: absorbed by gut and carried by blood to periph
eral nerve synapses; blocks release of acetylcholine at myoneural junc
tion, resulting in a reversible flaccid paralysis
19
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Diseases
Table II 2 14. Forms of Botulism
Disease Adult Infant
Acquisition Preformed toxin Spores ingested:
ingested (toxicosis) household dust,
honey
Poorly canned alkaline
vegetables (green Toxin produced in gut
beans) (toxi infection)
Symptoms 1–2 day onset of Constipation,
weakness, dizziness, limpness/flaccid
blurred vision, flaccid paralysis (reversible):
paralysis (reversible), diplopia, dysphagia,
constipation weak feeding /crying;
may lead to respira
tory arrest
Toxin demonstrated in Suspected food Stool or serum
Treatment Respiratory support Respiratory support in
monitored intensive
Trivalent (A B E)
care; hyperimmune
antitoxin
human serum
Antibiotics generally
not used as may
worsen or prolong
Prevention Proper canning; No honey first
heat all canned foods 2 year
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES Clostridium perfringens
Clostridium perfringens
Distinguishing Features
• Contaminated wound
• Large gram positive, spore forming rods (spores rare in tissue), nonmotile
• Pain, edema, gas, fever, tachycardia
• Anaerobic: “stormy fermentation” in milk media
• Food poisoning: reheated meats, • Double zone of hemolysis
noninflammatory diarrhea
Reservoir: soil and human colon
Transmission: foodborne and traumatic implantation
Pathogenesis
• Spores germinate under anaerobic conditions in tissue.
• Vegetative cells produce alpha toxin (phospholipase C), a lecithinase,
which disrupts membranes, damaging RBCs, platelets, WBCs, and
endothelial cells. Can lead to massive hemolysis, tissue destruction, and
hepatic toxicity.
• Identified by Nagler reaction: egg yolk agar plate: one side with anti α toxin;
lecithinase activity is detected on side with no antitoxin
• Twelve other toxins damage tissues
• Enterotoxin produced in intestines in food poisoning: disrupts ion transport
→ watery diarrhea, cramps (similar to E. coli); resolution <24 hrs
198
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
Disease(s)
• Gas gangrene (myonecrosis)
– Contamination of wound with soil or feces
– Acute and increasing pain at wound site
– Tense tissue (edema, gas) and exudate
– Systemic symptoms include fever and tachycardia (disproportionate to
fever), diaphoresis, pallor, etc.
– Rapid, high mortality
• Food poisoning: reheated meat dishes, organism grows to high numbers;
8–24 hr incubation; enterotoxin production in gut; self limiting noninflam
matory, watery diarrhea
Diagnosis: clinical
Treatment: debridement, delayed closure, clindamycin and penicillin, hyperbaric
chamber for gangrene; food poisoning is self limiting
Prevention: extensive debridement of wound plus penicillin
Clostridium septicum
Distinguishing features: anaerobic, gram positive rods
Transmission: endogenous
Disease: septic shock in colon cancer patients
Clostridioides (Clostridium) difficile KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Reservoir: human colon/gastrointestinal tract Clostridioides (Clostridium) difficile
Transmission: endogenous • Hospitalized patient on antibiotics
• Develops colitis, diarrhea
Pathogenesis
• Toxin A: enterotoxin damaging mucosa leading to fluid increase; granulocyte
attractant
• Toxin B: cytotoxin; cytopathic
Disease(s): antibiotic associated (clindamycin, cephalosporins, amoxicillin,
ampicillin) diarrhea, colitis, or pseudomembranous colitis (yellow plaques on
colon)
Diagnosis: stool exam for toxin production (culture is not diagnostic because
organism is part of normal flora)
Treatment: for mild disease discontinue other antibiotics; for severe disease
vancomycin or metronidazole; for chronic infections fecal transplant
Prevention: avoid overprescribing broad spectrum antibiotics (consider limited
spectrum drugs first); in nursing home setting, isolate symptomatic patients and
use autoclave bed pans (treatment kills spores)
19
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Recall Question
Where are spores of Clostridium botulinum commonly be found?
A. Animal fur
B. Fresh fruit
C. Human hair
D. Nasopharyngeal mucosa
E. Soil
Answer: E
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES GENUS: LISTERIA
Listeria monocytogenes
Listeria monocytogenes
• Gram (+), β hemolytic bacilli, cold
growth
Distinguishing Features
• Facultative intracellular
• Small gram positive rods
• Foodborne (deli foods)
• Beta hemolytic, nonspore forming rod on blood agar, CAMP positive
• Transplacental—granulomatosis
• Tumbling motility in broth; actin jet motility in cells
infantiseptica
• Facultative intracellular parasite
• Neonatal septicemia and meningitis
• Cold growth
(third most common cause)
Reservoir
• Meningitis in renal transplant or
cancer patients (most common cause) • Widespread: animals (GI and genital tracts), unpasteurized milk products,
plants, and soil
• Cold growth: contaminated food, soft cheese, deli meat, cabbage (coleslaw),
hot dogs, fruit, ice cream
Transmission: foodborne or vertical
Pathogenesis
• Listeriolysin O, a β hemolysin, facilitates rapid egress from phagosome into
cytoplasm, thus evading killing when lysosomal contents are dumped into
phagosome; “jets” directly (by actin filament formation) from cytoplasm to
another cell
• Immunocompromised status predisposes to serious infection
20
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
Disease(s)
• Listeriosis (human, peaks in summer)
– Healthy adults and children: generally asymptomatic or diarrhea with
low % carriage
– Pregnant women: symptomatic carriage, septicemia characterized by
fever and chills; can cross the placenta in septicemia
• Neonatal disease
– Early onset: (granulomatosis infantisepticum) in utero transmission;
sepsis with high mortality; disseminated granulomas with central
necrosis
– Late onset: 2–3 weeks after birth from fecal exposure; meningitis with
septicemia
• In immunocompromised patients
– Septicemia and meningitis (most common clinical presentation)
– Listeria meningitis most common cause of meningitis in renal trans
plant patients and adults with cancer
Diagnosis: blood or CSF culture at 4°C; CSF or Gram stain (>25% lymphocytes
+ PMNs)
Treatment: ampicillin with gentamicin added for immunocompromised patients
Prevention: pregnant and immunocompromised patients should avoid cold deli
food
GENUS: CORYNEBACTERIUM
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Distinguishing Features
• Gray to black colonies of club shaped gram positive rods arranged in V or Corynebacterium diphtheriae
L shapes on Gram stain
• Gram (+), aerobic, non−spore forming
• Granules (volutin) produced on Loeffler coagulated serum medium stain
rods
metachromatically
• Bull neck, myocarditis, nerve palsies
• Toxin producing strains have β prophage carrying genes for the toxin
(lysogeny, β corynephage). The phage from one person with diphtheria • Gray pseudomembrane → airway
can infect the normal nontoxigenic diphtheroid of another, and thus cause
obstruction
diphtheria.
• Toxin produced by lysogeny
Reservoir: throat and nasopharynx
• Toxin ribosylates eEF 2; heart, nerve
Transmission: bacterium or phage via respiratory droplets
damage
20
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Pathogenesis
• Organism not invasive; colonizes epithelium of oropharynx or skin in cuta
neous diphtheria
• Diphtheria toxin (A B component): inhibits protein synthesis by adding
ADP ribose to eEF 2
• Effect on oropharynx: dirty gray pseudomembrane (made up of dead cells
and fibrin exudate, bacterial pigment)
• Extension into larynx/trachea, leading to possible obstruction
• Effect of systemic circulation, leading to possible heart and nerve damage
Disease: diphtheria (sore throat with pseudomembrane, bull neck, potential
respiratory obstruction, myocarditis, cardiac dysfunction, recurrent laryngeal
nerve palsy, and lower limb polyneuritis), renal failure
Diagnosis
• Elek test to document toxin production (ELISA for toxin is now gold
standard)
• Toxin produced by Elek test toxin producing strains diffuses away from
growth
• Antitoxin diffuses away from strip of filter paper
• Precipitin lines form at zone of equivalence
Filter paper strip with C. diphtheriae antitoxin
Precipitin line
Known toxigenic C. diphtheriae
Unknown (pt's isolate)
Known nontoxigenic C. diphtheriae
Figure II 2 6. Elek Test
Figure II 2 2. Elek Test
Treatment: erythromycin and antitoxin; for endocarditis, intravenous penicillin
and aminoglycosides for 4–6 weeks
Prevention: toxoid vaccine (formaldehyde modified toxin is still immunogenic
but with reduced toxicity), part of DTaP, DTP, or Td, boosters 10 year intervals
20
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
GENUS: ACTINOMYCES
Actinomyces israelii KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
• Patient with mycetoma on jaw line or
Distinguishing Features spread from IUD
• Anaerobic
• Sulfur granules in pus grow anaerobic,
• Branching rods gram (+), non acid fast branching
• Non acid fast rods
Reservoir: human; normal flora of gingival crevices and female genital tract
Transmission: endogenous
Pathogenesis: invasive growth in tissues with compromised oxygen supply
Disease: actinomycosis
• Generally not painful but very invasive, penetrating all tissues including
bone
• Tissue swelling can lead to draining abscesses (sinus tracts) with “sulfur”
granules (hard yellow microcolonies) in exudate that can be used for
microscopy or culture
• Only in tissues with low oxygenation (Eh)
– Cervicofacial (lumpy jaw): dental trauma or poor oral hygiene
– Pelvic: from thoracic or sometimes IUDs
– Abdominal: surgery or bowel trauma
– Thoracic: aspiration with contiguous spread
– CNS: solitary brain abscess (Nocardia will produce multiple foci)
Diagnosis: identify gram positive branching bacilli in “sulfur granules”; colonies
resemble molar tooth
Treatment: penicillin V and surgical drainage; metronidazole not effective
GENUS: NOCARDIA
Nocardia asteroides and Nocardia brasiliensis KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Distinguishing Features: aerobic; Gram positive branching rods (some areas of Nocardia asteroides and Nocardia
smear will be blue and some red; partially acid fast) brasiliensis
Reservoir: soil and dust • Gram (+) filamentous bacilli, aerobic,
partially acid fast
Transmission: airborne or traumatic transplantation
• Cavitary bronchopulmonary disease,
Pathogenesis: no known toxins or virulence factors; immunosuppression and
mycetomas
cancer predispose to pulmonary infection
20
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Diseases
• Nocardiosis
– Cavitary bronchopulmonary nocardiosis
– Mostly N. asteroides
– Can be acute, subacute, chronic
– Symptoms: cough, fever, dyspnea, localized or diffuse pneumonia with
cavitation
– May spread hematogenously to brain (brain abscesses)
• Cutaneous/subcutaneous nocardiosis
– Mostly N. brasiliensis
– Starts with traumatic implantation
– Symptoms: cellulitis with swelling can lead to draining subcutaneous
abscesses with granules (mycetoma)
Diagnosis: culture of sputum or pus from cutaneous lesion
Treatment: sulfonamides (high dose) or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP
SMX)
GENUS: MYCOBACTERIUM
Genus Features
• Acid fast rods with waxy cell wall
• Obligate aerobe
• Cell wall
– Unique: high concentration of lipids containing long chain fatty acids
(called mycolic acids)
– Wall makes mycobacteria highly resistant to desiccation and many
chemicals (including NaOH used to kill other bacteria in sputa before
neutralizing and culturing)
• Sensitive to UV
Species of Medical Importance
• M. tuberculosis
• M. leprae
• M. avium intracellulare
• M. kansasii
• M. marinum
• M. ulcerans
20
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Distinguishing Features
• Auramine rhodamine staining bacilli (fluorescent apple green); no Mycobacterium tuberculosis
antibody involved (sensitive but not specific)
• High risk patient (poverty, HIV+,
• Acid fast
IV drug user)
• Aerobic, slow growing on Lowenstein Jensen medium; new culture
• Chronic cough, weight loss
systems (broths with palmitic acid) faster
• Produces niacin • Ghon complex
• Produces a heat sensitive catalase: catalase negative at 68.0 C (154.4 F) • Auramine rhodamine staining, acid
(standard catalase test); catalase active at body temperature fast bacilli in sputum
Reservoir: human lungs
• Produce niacin, heat sensitive catalase
Transmission: respiratory droplets
• Positive PPD
• Facultative intracellular
Pathogenesis
• Facultative intracellular organism (most important)
• Sulfatides (sulfolipids in cell envelope): inhibit phagosome lysosome
fusion, allowing intracellular survival (if fusion occurs, waxy nature of
cell envelope reduces killing effect)
• Cord factor (trehalose dimycolate): causes serpentine growth in vitro;
inhibits leukocyte migration; disrupts mitochondrial respiration and
Cord Factor
Figure II 2 7.
oxidative phosphorylation
Cord Factor
• Tuberculin (surface protein) along with mycolic acid → delayed hypersensi
tivity and cell mediated immunity (CMI): granulomas and caseation medi
ated by CMI; no exotoxins or endotoxin; damage done by immune system
Disease(s)
• Primary pulmonary TB
– Symptoms can include fever, dry cough
– Organisms replicate in naive alveolar macrophages, killing the
macrophages until CMI is set up (Ghon focus)
– Macrophages transport the bacilli to the regional lymph node (Ghon
complex) and most people heal without disease
– Organisms that are walled off within the Ghon complex remain viable
unless treated
• Reactivational TB
– Symptoms can include fever, hemoptysis, night sweats, weight loss
– Erosion of granulomas into airways (high oxygen) later in life under
conditions of reduced T cell immunity can lead to mycobacterial
replication and disease symptoms
– Complex disease with the potential of infecting any organ system
– May disseminate (miliary TB): kidneys, GI tract, brain, spine (Pott
disease)
20
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Diagnosis
• Microscopy of sputum: screen with auramine rhodamine stain (fluorescent
apple green); no antibody involved; very sensitive; if positive, confirm with
• acid fast stain
• PPD skin test (Mantoux): measure zone of induration at 48–72
hours; positive if:
– ≥5 mm in HIV+ or anyone with recent TB exposure; AIDS patients
have reduced ability to mount skin test.
– ≥10 mm in high risk population: IV drug abusers, people living in pov
erty, or immigrants from high TB area
– ≥15 mm in low risk population
• Positive skin test indicates exposure but not necessarily active disease
• QuantiFERON TB Gold Test: measures interferon gamma production
when leukocytes exposed to TB antigens
• Slow growing (3–6 weeks) colonies on Lowenstein Jensen medium (faster
new systems)
• Organisms produce niacin and are catalase negative (68 C [154.4 F])
• No serodiagnosis
Treatment: multiple drugs critical to treat infection
• Standard observed short term therapy for uncomplicated pulmonary TB
(rate where acquired resistance <4%):
– First 2 months: rifampin + isoniazid + pyrazinamide + ethambutol
(RIPE)
– Next 4 months: rifampin and isoniazid
• Streptomycin added for possible drug resistant cases until susceptibility
tests are back (if area acquired has >4% drug resistant mycobacteria)
• For MDR TB, use 3−5 previously unused drugs: aminoglycosides, fluoroqui
nolones, thioamide, cycloserine, bedaquiline
Prevention
• Isoniazid taken for 9 months can prevent TB in persons with infection but
no clinical symptoms
• Bacille Calmette Guérin (BCG) vaccine containing live, attenuated
organisms may prevent disseminated disease; not used in U.S.
• UV light or HEPA filter used to treat potentially contaminated air
20
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
Recall Question
Which of the following is a clinical feature of diphtheria?
A. Tendonitis
B. Aortic aneurysm
C. Bull neck
D. Cirrhosis
Answer: C
Mycobacteria Other than Tuberculosis (MOTTS) NOTE
• M. tuberculosis in HIV patient with
Distinguishing Features normal count or low CD4 count
• Atypical mycobacteria (disseminated)
• Noncontagious • MAI only in late HIV patient with low
• Found in surface waters, soil, cigarettes CD4 coun
Table II 2 15. MOTTS
Clinical
Organism Disease Transmission Presentation Treatment
M. avium Pulmonary, GI, Respiratory, AIDS patients, AIDS patients prophylaxis
intracellulare Disseminated ingestion cancer, chronic <50 CD4+ cells/mm3;
lung disease macrolide plus ethambutol
M. kansasii
M. ulcerans Buruli ulcer Wound con Ulcer Rifampin and streptomycin
(Africa) tamination
M. marinum Soft tissue Abrasions Cutaneous Isoniazid; rifampin or
infections granulomas in ethambutol
“fish tank tropical fish
granuloma” enthusiasts
Mycobacterium leprae
Distinguishing Features
• Acid fast rods (seen in punch biopsy)
• Obligate intracellular parasite (cannot be cultured in vitro)
• Optimal growth at less than body temperature
Reservoir: human mucosa, skin, and nerves are only significant reservoirs; some
infected armadillos in Texas and Louisiana
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Transmission: nasal discharge from untreated lepromatous leprosy patients
Leprosy
Pathogenesis: obligate intracellular parasite; cooler parts of body, e.g., skin,
mucous membranes, and peripheral nerves • Acid fast bacilli in punch biopsy
Disease(s): leprosy: a continuum of disease; usually starts with an indeterminate • Immigrant patient with sensory loss in
stage called “borderline” extremities
207
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 2 16. Extreme Forms of Leprosy
Tuberculoid B Lepromatous
Cell mediated Strong CMI (Th1) o Weak CMI (Th2)
immunity system r
Lepromin skin test Lepromin test + d Lepromin test -
e
Number of organ Low High (foam cells totally filled)
isms in tissue r
Damage from • Immune response (CMI l • Large number of intracellular
killing infected cells) organisms
i
• Granuloma formation → • Nerve damage from overgrowth
n
nerve enlargement/damage of bacteria in cells
e
• Loss of sensation → burns • Loss of sensation → burns and
and trauma trauma
Number of Fewer lesions: macular; nerve • Numerous lesions becoming
lesions and other enlargement, nodular; loss of eyebrows;
symptoms destruction of nasal septum
paresthesia
• Paresthesia
• Leonine facies
Diagnosis: punch biopsy or nasal scrapings; acid fast stain; lepromin skin test
(positive in tuberculoid form but not in lepromatous form); no cultures
Treatment: multiple drug therapy with dapsone and rifampin, with clofazimine
added for lepromatous
Prevention: dapsone for close family contacts
GRAM NEGATIVE COCCI
GENUS: NEISSERIA
Table II 2 17. Medically Important Neisseria Species
Portal of Glucose Maltose β Lactamase
Organism Capsule Vaccine Entry Fermentation Fermentation Production
N. meningitidis Yes Yes Respiratory Yes Yes Rare
N. gonorrhoeae No No Genital Yes No Commo
NOTE
Oxidase
Neisseria meningitidis
• Oxidase (cytochrome C oxidase) test:
flood colony with phenylenediamine; in Distinguishing Features
presence of oxidase, phenylenediamine
• Gram negative, kidney bean–shaped diplococci
turns black. Rapid test.
• Oxidase positive
• Major oxidase negative gram negative • Large capsule; latex particle agglutination (or CIE, counter immunoelec
group is Enterobacteriaceae. trophoresis) to identify N. meningitidis capsular antigens in CSF
208
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
• Grows on chocolate (not blood) agar in 5% CO2 atmosphere
• Ferments maltose in contrast to gonococci
Reservoir: human nasopharynx (5–10% carriers)
Transmission: respiratory droplets; oropharyngeal colonization, spreads to
meninges via bloodstream; disease occurs in only small percentage of colonized
individuals
Pathogenesis: important virulence factors
• Polysaccharide capsule: antiphagocytic, antigenic, 5 common serogroups: B KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
is not strongly immunogenic (sialic acid); B strain is most common strain in
Meningococcal Meningitis
U.S.; Used for serogrouping, detection in CSF, and vaccine
• Gram ( ) diplococcus in CSF
• IgA protease allows oropharynx colonization
• Endotoxin (lipooligosaccharide): fever, septic shock in meningococcemia, • Young adults with meningitis
overproduction of outer membrane
• Abrupt onset with signs of endotoxin
• Pili and outer membrane proteins important in ability to colonize and
toxicit
invade
• Deficiency in late complement components (C5–C9) predisposes to
bacteremia
Disease(s): meningitis and meningococcemia
• Abrupt onset with fever, chills, malaise, prostration, and rash that is
generally petechial; rapid decline
• Fulminant cases: ecchymoses, DIC, shock, coma, and death (Waterhouse
Friderichsen syndrome)
Diagnosis: Gram stain of CSF; PCR; latex agglutination
Treatment: ampicillin and cefotaxime (neonates/infants); cefotaxime or ceftriax
one with or without vancomycin (children and adults)
Prevention: vaccine: conjugate for strains Y, W 135, C, and A, recombinant for
serotype B, prophylaxis of close contacts with rifampin (or ciprofloxacin)
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Distinguishing Features KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
• Gram negative, kidney bean–shaped diplococci Neisseria gonorrhoeae
• Oxidase positive
• Sexually active patient
Reservoir: human genital tract
• Urethral/vaginal discharge
Transmission: sexual contact, birth; sensitive to drying and cold (leukorrhea)
• Arthritis possible
Pathogenesis
• Neonatal ophthalmia
• Pili: attachment to mucosal surfaces; inhibit phagocytic uptake; antigen
ic variation: >1 million variants
• Gram ( ) diplococcus in neutrophils
• Outer membrane proteins: OMP I structural, antigen used in serotyping;
Opa proteins (opacity) antigenic variation, adherence; IgA protease aids
in colonization and cellular uptake
• Organism invades mucosal surfaces and causes inflammation.
209
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Disease: gonorrhea
• Male: urethritis, proctitis
• Female: endocervicitis, PID (contiguous spread), arthritis, proctitis
• Infants: ophthalmia (rapidly leads to blindness if untreated)
• Disseminated disease: arthritis, skin lesions
• Gonococcal pharyngitis
Diagnosis
• Intracellular gram negative diplococci in PMNs from urethral smear
• Commonly: diagnosis by genetic probes with amplification
• Culture (when done) on Thayer Martin medium
– Oxidase positive colonies
– Maltose not fermented
– No capsule
Treatment: ceftriaxone; test for C. trachomatis or treat with macrolide (doxycy
cline alternative); plasmid mediated β lactamase produces high level penicillin
resistance
Prevention: condoms (adult forms have no vaccine); for neonates, silver nitrate or
erythromycin ointment in eyes at birth
Moraxella catarrhalis
Distinguishing Features
• Gram negative diplococcus
• Close relative of Neisseria
Reservoir: normal upper respiratory tract flora
Transmission: respiratory droplets
Pathogenesis: endotoxin may play role in disease
Disease(s): otitis media; sinusitis; bronchitis and bronchopneumonia in elderly
patients with COPD
Treatment: amoxicillin and clavulanate, second or third generation cephalospo
rin or TMP SMX; drug resistance is a problem (most strains produce a
β lactamase)
21
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
GRAM NEGATIVE BACILLI KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Pseudomonas
GENUS: PSEUDOMONAS • Gram ( ), oxidase (+), aerobic
bacillus
Genus Features
• Blue green pigments, fruity odor
• Gram negative rod
• Burn infections—blue green pus, fruity
• Oxidase positive, catalase positive
odor
• Aerobic (nonfermenting)
• Typical pneumonia—CGD or CF
Species of Medical Pseudomonas sp.Importance: Pseudomonas aeruginosa
• UTI—catheterized patients
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
NOTE
Distinguishing Features
• Oxidase positive, Gram negative rods, nonfermenting Pseudomonas Medical Ecology
• Pigments: pyocyanin (blue green) and fluorescein
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a ubiquitous
• Grape like odor water and soil organism that grows to very
• Slime layer high numbers overnight in standing water
(distilled or tap). Sources for infection
• Non–lactose fermenting colonies on EMB or MacConkey
include:
• Biofilm
• Raw vegetables, respirators,
Reservoir: ubiquitous in water
humidifiers, sink drains, faucet
Transmission: water aerosols, raw vegetables, flowers aerators, cut and potted flowers, and,
if not properly maintained, whirlpools
Pathogenesis
• Transient colonization of colon in
• Endotoxin causes inflammation in tissues and gram negative shock in
about 10% of people; bacteria get on
septicemia
skin from fecal organisms; requires
• Pseudomonas exotoxin A ADP ribosylates eEF 2, inhibiting protein
exquisitely careful housekeeping and
synthesis (like diphtheria toxin)
restricted diets in burn units
• Liver is primary target
• Capsule/slime layer allows formation of pulmonary microcolonies; difficult
to remove by phagocytosis
Disease(s)
• Healthy people: transient GI tract colonization (loose stool 10% population);
hot tub folliculitis; eye ulcer (trauma, coma, prolonged contact wear)
• Burn patients: GI tract colonization → skin → colonization of eschar
→ cellulitis (blue green pus) → septicemia
• Neutropenic patients: pneumonia and septicemia (often superinfection,
i.e., infection while on antibiotics)
• Chronic granulomatous disease: pneumonias, septicemias (Pseudomonas
is catalase positive); [diabetic] osteomyelitis (diabetic foot)
21
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
• Otitis externa: swimmers, diabetics, those with pierced ears
• Septicemias: fever, shock ± skin lesions (black, necrotic center, erythema
tous margin, ecthyma gangrenosum)
• Catheterized patients: urinary tract infection
• Cystic fibrosis: early pulmonary colonization, recurrent pneumonia; always
high slime producing strain
NOTE Diagnosis: Gram stain and culture
Drug Resistance in P. aeruginosa Treatment: antipseudomonal penicillin and an aminoglycoside or fluoroquino
lone
Susceptibilities important and drug
resistance very common. Prevention: pasteurize or disinfect water related equipment, hand washing;
prompt removal of catheters; avoid flowers and raw vegetables in burn units
Intrinsic resistance (missing high affinity
porin some drugs enter through); plasmid
mediated β lactamases and acetylating Burkholderia cepacia
enzymes. Distinguishing Features: oxidase positive, catalase positive; non fermenting
Transmission: water aerosols, person person (respiratory droplets)
Disease(s): cystic fibrosis (recurrent pneumonia); CGD (pneumonia, septicemia)
Treatment: trimethoprim sulfamethoxazole
Acinetobacter baumannii
Distinguishing Features: oxidase negative; non fermenting; biofilm
Transmission: wound infection or nosocomial
Disease(s): wound infection and pneumonia in military personnel; ‘Iraqibacter’
Treatment: highly drug resistant; carbapenem or polymyxin
Recall Question
Which of the following is the gold test for Mycobacterium
tuberculosis?
A. Acid fast stain
B. PPD skin test
C. QuantiFERON TB test
D. Serodiagnosis
E. Sputum microscopy
Answer: C
21
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
GENUS: LEGIONELLA
Legionella pneumophila KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Legionella pneumophila
Distinguishing Features
• Elderly smoker, heavy drinker, or
• Stain poorly with standard Gram stain; gram negative
immunosuppressed
• Fastidious requiring increased iron and cysteine for laboratory culture
• Exposure to aerosols of water
(BCYE, buffered charcoal, yeast extract)
• Facultative intracellular • Atypical pneumonia
Reservoir: rivers/streams/amebae; air conditioning water cooling tanks • Triad of atypical pneumonia, diarrhea,
and hyponatremia
Transmission: aerosols from contaminated air conditioning; no human to
human transmission
Predisposing Factors: smokers age >55 with high alcohol intake; immunosup
pressed patients such as renal transplant patients
Pathogenesis: facultative intracellular pathogen; endotoxin
Disease(s)
• Legionnaires disease (“atypical pneumonia”): associated with air condition
ing systems (now routinely decontaminated); pneumonia; hyponatremia;
mental confusion; diarrhea (no Legionella in GI tract)
• Pontiac fever: pneumonitis; no fatalities
Diagnosis
• Urinary antigen test (serogroup 1)
• DFA (direct fluorescent antibody) on biopsy, (+) by Dieterle silver stain
• Fourfold increase in antibody
Treatment: fluoroquinolone (levofloxacin) or macrolide (azithromycin) with
rifampin (immunocompromised patients); drug must penetrate human cells.
Prevention: routine decontamination of air conditioner cooling tanks
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
GENUS: FRANCISELLA
Francisella tularensis
Francisella tularensis • Hunter with ulceroglandular disease,
atypical pneumonia, or GI disease
Distinguishing Features
• Arkansas/Missouri
• Small gram negative rod
• Exposure to rabbits, ticks
• Potential biowarfare agent
• Zoonosis
Reservoir: many species of wild animals, especially rabbits, deer, and rodents;
endemic in every state of the U.S. but highest in Arkansas and Missouri
21
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Transmission
• Tick bite (Dermacentor) → ulceroglandular disease, characterized by fever,
ulcer at bite site, and regional lymph node enlargement and necrosis
• Traumatic implantation while skinning rabbits → ulceroglandular
disease
• Aerosols (skinning rabbits) → pneumonia
• Ingestion (of undercooked, infected meat or contaminated water) produces
typhoidal tularemia.
Pathogenesis: facultative intracellular pathogen (localizes in reticuloendothelial
cells); granulomatous response
Disease: ulceroglandular tularemia (open wound contact with rabbit blood; tick
bite); pneumonic tularemia (bioterrorism; atypical pneumonia)
Diagnosis: serodiagnosis (culture is hazardous); DFA; grows on BCYE
Treatment: streptomycin
Prevention: protection against tick bites; glove use while butchering rabbits; live,
attenuated vaccine (for those at high risk)
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES GENUS: BORDETELLA
Bordetella pertussis
• Unvaccinated child (immigrant family Genus Features
or religious objections) • Gram negative small rods
• Strict aerobes
• Cough with inspiratory “whoop”
Species of Medical Importance: Bordetella pertussis
NOTE Bordetella pertussis
B. pertussis Immunity Distinguishing Features: small gram negative, aerobic rods; encapsulated
organism
• Vaccine immunity lasts 5–10 yrs (and
is primarily IgA) Reservoir: human (vaccinated)
• Babies born with little immunity Transmission: respiratory droplets
• Vaccinated humans >10 yrs serve as
Pathogenesis
reservoir
• B. pertussis is mucosal surface pathogen
• 12–20% of afebrile adults with cough
• Attachment to nasopharyngeal ciliated epithelial cells is via filamentous
>2 wks have pertussis
hemagglutinin; pertussis toxin (on outer membrane) aids in attachment
• Vaccine (DTaP vaccineDTaP) • Toxins damage respiratory epithelium.
• Acellular – Adenylate cyclase toxin: impairs leukocyte chemotaxis → inhibits
phagocytosis and causes local edema
• Components: immunogens vary by
– Tracheal cytotoxin: interferes with ciliary action; kills ciliated cells
manufacturer; pertussis toxoid;
filamentous hemagglutinin; pertactin – Endotoxin
(OMP)
21
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
– Pertussis toxin (A and B component, OM protein toxin): ADP ribosyl
ation of Gi (inhibiting negative regulator of adenylate cyclase) interferes
with transfer of signals from cell surface to intracellular mediator system:
lymphocytosis; islet activation leading to hypoglycemia; blocking of
immune effector cells (decreased chemotaxis); increased histamine
sensitivity
Table II 2 18. Stages of Whooping Cough (Pertussis) vs. Results of Bacterial Culture
Incubation Catarrhal Paroxysmal Convalescent
Duration 7–10 days 1–2 weeks 2–4 weeks 3–4 weeks (or longer)
Symptoms None Rhinorrhea, Repetitive cough with Diminished paroxysmal cough,
malaise, sneez whoops, vomiting, development of secondary
ing, anorexia leukocytosis complications (pneumonia,
seizures, encephalopathy)
Bacterial Culture
Diagnosis
• Fastidious/delicate: Regan Lowe or Bordet Gengou media; either direct
cough plates or nasopharyngeal cultures
• Difficult to culture from middle of paroxysmal stage on
• Direct immunofluorescence (DFA) on nasopharyngeal smear
• PCR and serologic tests available
Treatment: supportive care, i.e., hospitalization if age <6 months; erythromycin
for 14 days including all household contacts
Prevention: vaccine DTaP (acellular pertussis: filamentous hemagglutinin plus
pertussis toxoid); immunity wanes 5–7 years; babies are born with little or no
immunity (IgA) from mother
GENUS: BRUCELLA
Brucella Species KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Brucella
Distinguishing Features
• Patient with acute septicemia
• Small gram negative rods, aerobic
• Exposure to animals or unpasteurized
• Facultative intracellular
dairy
• Zoonosis
• California/Texas or travel to Mexico
• Culture is hazardous
• Potential bioterrorism agent
Reservoir: domestic livestock
21
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
NOTE Transmission
Zoonotic Organisms • Unpasteurized dairy products (California and Texas highest number of
cases; most associated with travel to Mexico)
• Brucella
• Direct contact with the animal, work in slaughterhouse
• Bacillus anthracis
– Brucella abortus: cattle
• Listeria monocytogenes – Brucella melitensis: goats
• Salmonella enteritidis – Brucella suis: pigs
– Brucella canis: dogs
• Campylobacter
• Chlamydophila psittaci
Pathogenesis
• Francisella tularensis
• Endotoxin
• Yersinia pestis • Facultative intracellular parasite (localizes in cells of reticuloendothelial
system) → septicemia
• Granulomatous response with central necrosis
Disease: brucellosis (undulant fever)
• Acute septicemias
• Fever 37.7–40.0 C (100.0–104.0 F) (often in evening)
• Influenza like symptoms, including arthralgias, anorexia, myalgia, back
pain
• Profuse sweating
• Hepatomegaly
Diagnosis: culture is hazardous; serum agglutination test, fourfold increase in
titer; antibodies against Brucella>1:160 considered positive
Treatment: rifampin and doxycycline minimum 6 weeks (adults); rifampin and
cotrimoxazole (children)
Prevention: vaccinate cattle; pasteurize milk (especially goat milk)
GENUS: HAEMOPHILUS
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES Haemophilus influenzae
Haemophilus influenzae
Distinguishing Features
• Unvaccinated child 3 mo−2 y:
meningitis, pneumonia, epiglottitis • Encapsulated, gram negative rod; 95% of invasive disease caused by
capsular type b
• Smokers with COPD: bronchitis,
• Requires growth factors X (hemin) and V (NAD) for growth on nutrient
pneumonia
or blood agar (BA)
• Gram ( ) rod, requires factors X • Grows near S. aureus on BA = “satellite” phenomenon
and V
• Chocolate agar provides both X and V factors
Reservoir: human nasopharynx
Transmission: respiratory droplets, shared toys
21
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
Pathogenesis
• Polysaccharide capsule (type b capsule is polyribitol phosphate) most
important virulence factor
• Capsule important in diagnosis; antigen screen on CSF (e.g., latex particle
agglutination); serotype all isolates by quellung.
• IgA protease is a mucosal colonizing factor.
Diseases
• Meningitis
– Epidemic in unvaccinated children ages 3 months to 2 years
– After maternal antibody has waned and before immune response of child
is adequate
– Up to 1990, H. influenzae was most common cause of meningitis age 1–5
(mainly <2); is still a problem if child age <2 and not vaccinated
• Otitis media: usually nontypeable strains
• Bronchitis: exacerbations of acute bronchitis in smokers with COPD
• Pneumonia: 1–24 months; rare in vaccinated children; smokers
• Epiglottitis: rare in vaccinated children; seen in unvaccinated toddlers; H.
influenzae was major causal agent
Diagnosis: blood or CSF culture on chocolate agar; PCR; antigen detection of
capsule (latex particle agglutination)
Treatment: cefotaxime or ceftriaxone for empirical therapy of meningitis; check
nasal carriage before releasing; use rifampin if still colonized
Prevention
• Conjugate capsular polysaccharide protein vaccine
• Vaccination effective to prevent type b disease
– Polyribitol capsule conjugated to protein: (diphtheria toxoid or N.
meningitidis outer membrane proteins), making it a T cell dependent
vaccine
– Vaccine: 2, 4, 6 months; booster 15 months; 95% effective
• Rifampin reduces oropharynx colonization and prevents meningitis in
unvaccinated, close contacts age <2 years
21
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Haemophilus ducreyi
Reservoir: human genitals
Transmission: sexual transmission and direct contact
Diseases
• Chancroid
• Genital ulcers: soft, painful chancre (“You do cry with ducreyi.”)
• Slow to heal without treatment
• Open lesions increase transmission of HIV.
Diagnosis: DNA probe, ‘school of fish’ appearance on Gram stain
Treatment: azithromycin, ceftriaxone, or ciprofloxacin
Recall Question
Pseudomonas aeruginosa transmission occurs through which of
the following?
A. Animal contact
B. Blood to blood contact
C. Fecal contamination
D. Sexual contact
E. Raw vegetables
Answer: E
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES GENUS: PASTEURELLA
Pasteurella multocida
Pasteurella multocida
• Patient with animal (cat) bite
Distinguishing Features: small gram negative rods; facultative anaerobic rods
• Cellulitis/lymphadenitis
Reservoir: mouths of many animals, especially cats and dogs
Transmission: animal bites; particularly cat bites
Pathogenesis: endotoxin, capsule; spreads rapidly within skin, no exotoxins
known
Disease: cellulitis with lymphadenitis (rapidly spreading wound infections,
frequently polymicrobial infections)
Diagnosis: rarely cultured because routine prophylaxis is common
Treatment: amoxicillin/clavulanate for cat bites; resistant to macrolides
Prevention: amoxicillin/clavulanate is standard prophylaxis and treatment for
most bites (including human), along with thorough cleaning
21
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
Table II 2 19. Additional Organisms Associated with Animal/Human bites
Organism Characteristics Reservoir/Transmission Disease Treatment
Eikenella corrodens Gram negative rods Human oropharynx Cellulitis Third generation
“corrodes” agar; human bites or fist cephalosporins;
bleach like odor fight injuries fluoroquinolones
Capnocytophaga Gram negative Dog oropharynx/ Cellulitis splenectomy Third generation
canimorsus filamentous rods dog bite wounds → overwhelming cephalosporins;
sepsis fluoroquinolones
resistant to
aminoglycosides
Bartonella henselae Gram negative rods Cats and dogs/bites, Cat scratch fever; Azithromycin;
scratches, fleas bacillary angiomato doxycycline
sis (AIDS)
HACEK GROUP INFECTIONS
• Group of gram negative fastidious rods
– Aggregatibacter aphrophilus (formerly Haemophilus aphrophilus)
– Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans
– Cardiobacterium hominis
– Eikenella corrodens
– Kingella kingae
• HACEK organisms responsible for 5–10% of infective endocarditis cases
(usually subacute)
• Most common cause of gram negative endocarditis in non–IV drug
use
• All part of normal oral flora
• Difficult to diagnose, with mean diagnosis time 3 months
• Treat with third generation cephalosporin or fluoroquinolone
GENUS: CAMPYLOBACTER
Campylobacter jejuni KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Distinguishing Features: Gram negative curved rods with polar flagella (“gulls’ Campylobacter jejuni
wings”); oxidase positive; microaerophilic; grows at 42°C on Campy or Skirrow
• Patient with inflammatory diarrhea
agar
• Gram ( ), curved rod,
Reservoir: intestinal tracts of humans, cattle, sheep, dogs, cats, poultry
microaerophilic, oxidase (+), grows at
Transmission: fecal oral, Skirrow agar primarily from poultry 42 C (107.6 F
Pathogenesis: low infectious dose (as few as 500); invades mucosa of the colon,
destroying mucosal surfaces; blood and pus in stools (inflammatory diarrhea);
rarely penetrates to cause septicemia
219
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Disease: gastroenteritis
• Common cause of infectious diarrhea worldwide
• In U.S., Campylobacter enteritis > (Salmonella plus Shigella)
• ≥10 stools/day (may be frankly bloody)
Campylobacter • Abdominal pain, fever, malaise, nausea, and vomiting
• Generally self limiting in 3–5 days but may last longer
• Complications
o Guillain Barré syndrome (GBS) → 30% of GBS in U.S. Serotype O:19,
antigenic cross reactivity between Campylobacter oligosaccharides and
glycosphingolipids on neural tissues
o Reactive arthritis (HLA B27)
Diagnosis: culture on Campylobacter or Skirrow agar at 42 C (107.6 F); micro
aerophilic
Treatment: mostly supportive, i.e., fluid and electrolyte replacement; erythromy
cin, fluoroquinolones; resistant to penicillins
GENUS: HELICOBACTER
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES Helicobacter pylori
Helicobacter pylori Distinguishing Features: Gram negative spiral gastric bacteria with flagella;
oxidase positive, urease positive; microaerophilic, grows at 37 C (98.6 F) on
• Patient with gastritis, ulcers, stomach
Campy or Skirrow agar
cancer
Reservoir: humans
• Gram ( ), helical bacilli, oxidase (+),
microaerophilic, urease (+) Transmission: fecal oral; oral oral
Pathogenesis
• Motile
• Urease positive: ammonium cloud neutralizes stomach acid, allowing
survival in stomach acid during transit to border
• Mucinase aids in penetration of mucous layer (rapid shift down to neutral
as it penetrates)
• Invasive into stomach lining where pH is neutral
• Inflammation is prominent
• Two biotypes (I and II); type I produces vacuolating cytotoxin
Diseases: chronic gastritis and duodenal ulcers
• Associated with several forms of stomach cancer (gastric adenocarcinoma,
gastric mucosa associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma [MALT oma], B cell
lymphomas)
• Now classed by WHO as type I carcinogen
22
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
Diagnosis
• Biopsy with culture; histology with Giemsa or silver stain
• Urea breath test: 13C urea swallowed; ammonia + 13C CO2 exhaled
• Serology
Treatment: myriad of regimens; treat for 10–14 days
• Triple therapy, e.g., omeprazole + amoxicillin + clarithromycin
• Quadruple therapy when clarithromycin resistance ≥15%), e.g., PPI +
bismuth + 2 antibiotics (metronidazole + tetracycline)
GENUS: VIBRIO
Genus Features
• Gram negative curved rod with polar flagella
• Oxidase positive
• Vibrionaceae
• Growth on alkaline, but not acidic, media (TCBS, thiosulfate citrate bile salt
sucrose medium)
Species of Medical Importance
• Vibrio cholerae
• Vibrio parahaemolyticus
• Vibrio vulnificus
Vibrio cholerae KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Distinguishing Features: rice water diarrhea; growth on TCBS Vibrio cholerae
• Patient with noninflammatory diarrhea
Reservoir
• Rice water stool
• Human colon; no vertebrate animal carriers (copepods or shellfish may be
contaminated by water contamination)
• Dehydration from cholera
• Human carriage may persist after untreated infection for months after infec
• Travel to endemic area
tion; permanent carrier state is rare.
Transmission: fecal oral spread; sensitive to stomach acid; if stomach acid is • Gram ( ) curved rods, polar flagella,
normal, requires high dose (>107 organisms) oxidase (+)
• Alkaline growth
Pathogenesis
• Motility, mucinase, and toxin coregulated pili (TCP) aid in attachment to the
intestinal mucosa.
• Cholera enterotoxin (choleragen) similar to E. coli LT; ADP ribosylates
(Gs alpha) activating adenylate cyclase → increased cAMP → efflux of Clˉ
and H2O (persistent activation of adenylate cyclase)
22
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Disease: cholera
• Rice water stools, tremendous fluid loss
• Hypovolemic shock if not treated
Diagnosis: culture stool on TCBS; oxidase positive
Treatment: fluid and electrolyte replacement; doxycycline or ciprofloxacin to
shorten disease and reduce carriage (tetracycline reportedly resistant)
Prevention: proper sanitation; new vaccine
Other Vibrio Species
Table II 2 20. Additional Vibrio Species
Species Reservoir Transmission Disease Symptoms Treatment
V. parahaemolyticus Marine life Consumption of Gastroenteritis Watery diarrhea Self limiting
undercooked or with cramping
raw seafood and abdominal
pain
V. vulnificus Brackish Consumption of Gastroenteritis Watery diarrhea Self limiting
water, undercooked or with cramping
oysters raw seafood and abdominal
pain
Swimming in Cellulitis Rapidly spread Tetracycline;
brackish water, ing; difficult to third generation
shucking oysters treat cephalosporins
Recall Question
Which of the following is a feature of the chancre caused by
Haemophilus ducreyi?
A. Appearance at oral cutaneous junction
B. Fast healing
C. Hard feel
D. Painful
Answer: D
22
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
FAMILY: ENTEROBACTERIACEAE
Family Features
• Gram negative rods
• Facultative anaerobes
• Ferment glucose
• Cytochrome C oxidase negative
• Reduce nitrates to nitrites
• Catalase positive
Family Pathogenesis
• Endotoxin; some also produce exotoxins
• Antigens
– O: cell envelope or O antigen
– H: flagellar (motile cells only) antigen
Antigens
– K: capsular polysaccharide antigen OO == Outer
membrane
– Vi (virulence): Salmonella capsular antigen
HH == Flagella
KK == CCapsule
Lab Diagnosis
VVVii == Capsule of
• Blood agar
Salmonella
• Eosin methylene blue or MacConkey agar (differentiate lactose fermenta
tion)
• Lactose fermenters (colored colonies)
• Non–lactose fermenters (colorless colonies)
Antigens of Enterobacteriaceae
Figure II 2 10. Antigens
Gram negative Rods
of Enterobacteriacae
+ Oxidase -
Non fermenter Curved Enterobacteriaceae
Pseudomonas + Lactose -
42 C (107.6 F) TCBS
H2S,
Campylobacter Vibrio + motile -
+ Urease -
Proteus Salmonella
Bipolar
+ Indole - + staining -
E. coli Klebsiella Yersinia Shigella
Figure II 2 3. Differentiation of Gram Negative Rods
22
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
NOTE GENUS: ESCHERICHIA
E. coli identification from stool
Genus Features
• Isolation of E. coli from feces is not
by itself significant. • Gram negative rods
• Enterobacteriaceae
• Sorbitol MacConkey screen
• Ferments lactose
• Most E. coli ferment sorbitol
Species of Medical Importance—Escherichia coli
• Most EHEC do not (colorless)
E. coli from normal floras are more
Escherichia coli
commonly:
• Immunoassay looking for specific Distinguishing Features
protein antigens (on or excreted by the • Gram negative rod
bacterium)
• Facultative anaerobic, oxidase negative
• Serotyping since certain serotypes are
• E. coli is a lactose fermenter: colonies with iridescent green sheen on EMB
more often pathogenic
Reservoir: human colon; may colonize vagina or urethra; contaminated crops
• DNA probes for specific genes in a where human fecal fertilizer is used; enterohemorrhagic strains: bovine feces
culture
• PCR on clinical specimen Transmission
• Endogenous
Mnemonic • Fecal oral
Toxins ↑cAMP • Maternal fecal flora
c = cholera • Enterohemorrhagic
• strains: bovine fecal contamination (raw or undercooked beef, milk, apple
A= anthrax
juice from fallen apples)
Σ = ETEC LT
Pathogenesis: listed under specific diseases
P = pertussis
Mnemonic
PITcH
EPEC P = pediatric
EIEC I= inflammatory
ETEC T = traveler
C = coli
EHEC
H = hamburger
22
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
Table II 2 21. Disease Syndromes Caused by Escherichia coli
Mechanism of
Transmission Pathogenesis Clinical Clues Treatment
UTI Urinary tract infection (most common cause)
Endogenous fecal flora Motility Adherence to Gram ( ) bacilli, ≥105 Fluoroquinolone or
contaminate and ascend uroepithelium pyelone sulfonamides
CFU/ml
phritis associated pili,
X adhesins, β hemolytic
(many)
Neonatal septicemia/meningitis (second most common cause)
Maternal fecal flora contami Capsule: K1 serotype, Blood, cerebrospinal fluid Ceftriaxone
nate during parturition endotoxin culture, gram ( ) bacilli
Septicemia
Indwelling IV lines, cytotoxic Endotoxin Blood culture, gram ( ) Fluoroquinolones, third
drugs damage intestinal bacilli, oxidase ( ) generation cephalospo
mucosa, allow escape rins
Gastroenteritis
ETEC (traveler’s diarrhea) LT: heat labile toxin Noninflammatory diarrhea, Rehydration, TMP/SMX
Fecal/oral stimulates adenylate identify enterotoxin by may shorten symptoms
cyclase by ADP ribosyl immunoassay, bioassay,
ation of Gs DNA probe
ST: stimulates guanyl
ate cyclase; capsule
impedes phagocytosis;
colonizing factor
adhesins bind to
mucosa
EPEC (second most common Adherence to M cells → Noninflammatory diarrhea Beta lactams
infantile diarrhea) rearrangement of actin in babies in developing
Fecal/oral and effacement of countries
brush border microvilli
EIEC Invades large bowel Inflammatory diarrhea,
Fecal/oral Inflammatory diarrhea; blood, pus, fever, abdomi
similar to shigellosis, nal pain
induces formation of
actin jet trails
EAEC Adherence fimbriae can Noninflammatory diarrhea Ciprofloxacin if warranted
Fecal/oral induce IL 8 in adults and children in
United States
EHEC (VTEC): O157:H7 most Verotoxin: Shigella like No fever, no PMNs, blood Antibiotics ↑ risk of
common toxins 1 and 2, de in stool, nonfermenters of hemolytic uremic syn
Bovine feces, petting zoos creased protein synthe sorbitol; may progress to drome
sis by interfering with hemorrhagic colitis and
60S ribosomal subunit HUS; most common in
children age <5 years
Definition of abbreviations: EIEC, enteroinvasive E. coli; EHEC, enterohemorrhagic E. coli; EPEC, enteropathogenic E. coli, EAEC, enteroaggregative E. coli
22
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES GENUS: KLEBSIELLA
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Klebsiella pneumoniae
• Elderly patient with typical pneumonia:
currant jelly sputum
Distinguishing Features
• UTI (catheter associated)
• Gram negative rods with large polysaccharide capsule
• Septicemia: immunocompromised or
• Mucoid, lactose fermenting colonies on MacConkey agar
nosocomial
• Oxidase negative
• Gram ( ) bacilli, oxidase ( ),
Reservoir: human colon and upper respiratory tract
encapsulated, lactose fermenters
Transmission: endogenous
Pathogenesis: capsule (impedes phagocytosis); endotoxin (causes fever,
NOTE
inflammation, and shock [septicemia])
Comparative Microbiology
Disease(s)
Major encapsulated organisms
• Pneumonia
Some Killers Have Pretty Nice Capsules:
– Community acquired, most often older men; most commonly those
Strep pneumoniae with chronic lung disease, alcoholism, or diabetes (but this is not the
most common cause of pneumonia in alcoholics; S. pneumoniae is.)
Klebsiella pneumoniae
– Endogenous; assumed to reach lungs by inhalation of respiratory drop
Haemophilus influenzae Type b (a d) lets from upper respiratory tract
Pseudomonas aeruginosa – Frequent abscesses make it hard to treat; fatality rate high
– Sputum is generally thick and bloody (currant jelly) but not foul
Neisseria meningitidis
smelling as in anaerobic aspiration pneumonia
Cryptococcus neoformans (the yeast)
• Urinary tract infection: catheter related (nosocomial) from fecal con
tamination of catheters
(Not a complete list, just the big ones)
• Septicemia: in immunocompromised patients, may originate from bowel
defect or invasion of IV line
Diagnosis: culture of sputum or clean catch urine sample; lactose fermenter
Treatment: third generation cephalosporin with or without an aminoglycoside;
carbapenem for ESBL producing strains; KPC strains becoming more predominant
Prevention: good catheter care, limit use
Klebsiella granulomatis
Distinguishing Features: previously called Calymmatobacterium granulomatis;
facultative intracellular
Transmission: sexual contact
Disease(s): granuloma inguinale (Donovanosis): small painless nodules that burst
and ulcerate; beefy red painless genital ulcers
Diagnosis: Donovan bodies seen on Wright Giemsa stain; not seen on Gram stain
Treatment: doxycycline
22
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
GENUS: SHIGELLA
Species of Medical Importance NOTE
• Shigella sonnei (most common in U.S.) Comparative Microbiology
• Shigella flexneri
• Invasive bacteria: PMN in stool:
• Shigella dysenteriae (most severe disease) Shigella, Salmonella, Campylobacter,
• Shigella boydii EIEC
• Toxigenic bacteria: ETEC, V. cholerae,
Shigella Species C. perfringens, EHEC
Distinguishing Features
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
• Gram negative rods, nonmotile, non lactose fermenters
Shigella
Reservoir: human colon only (no animal carriers)
• Patient with acute bloody diarrhea and
Transmission: fecal oral spread, person to person
fever
Pathogenesis • Gram ( ) bacilli, which are
• Endotoxin triggers inflammation nonmotile, nonlactose fermenters, do
• No H antigens not produce H2S
• Shigellae invade M cells (membrane ruffling and macropinocytosis), get
into the cytoplasm, replicate, and then polymerize actin jet trails to go
laterally without going back out into the extracellular milieu. This
produces very shallow ulcers and rarely causes invasion of blood vessels.
• Shiga toxin:
– Produced by S. dysenteriae, type 1
– Three activities: neurotoxic, cytotoxic, enterotoxic
– AB component toxin is internalized in human cells; inhibits protein
synthesis by clipping 60S ribosomal subunit
Disease(s): enterocolitis/shigellosis (most severe form is dysentery)
• Few organisms required to start infection (1–10) (extremely acid resistant)
• 1–4 day incubation
• Organisms invade, producing bloody diarrhea
• Fever (generally >38.3 C [101.0 F]); lower abdominal cramps; tenesmus;
diarrhea first watery, then bloody; invasive but rarely causes septicemia;
shallow ulcers
• Severity depends on age of patient and strain; S. dysenteriae type 1 with
toxin most severe
Diagnosis: isolation from stool during illness and culture on selective media
Treatment: fluid and electrolyte replacement (mild cases); antibiotics (severe cases);
resistance is mediated by plasmid encoded enzymes; many strains are ampicillin
resistant
Prevention: proper sanitation (sewage, clean drinking water, hand washing)
22
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Aeromonas spp.
Distinguishing Features: oxidase positive; not Enterobacteriaceae
Transmission: contaminated water or food
Disease(s): inflammatory diarrhea similar to shigellosis (blood and PMNs)
Diagnosis: oxidase positive, flagellated, glucose fermenting, gram negative rods
Treatment: cefixime
Recall Question
Which of the following is the reservoir for Escherichia coli?
A. Colon
B. Liver
C. Lung
D. Nose
E. Stomach
Answer: A
GENUS: YERSINIA
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES Yersinia pestis
Yersinia pestis
Distinguishing Features
• Patient with high fever, buboes,
conjunctivitis, pneumonia • Small gram negative rods with bipolar staining
• Facultative intracellular parasite
• Exposure to small rodents, desert
• Coagulase positive
Southwest
Reservoir: zoonosis; U.S. desert southwest: rodents (e.g., prairie dogs, chip
• Bioterrorism
munks, squirrels); potential biowarfare agent
Transmission: wild rodents flea bite lead to sylvatic plague; human to human
transmission by respiratory droplets
Pathogenesis
• Coagulase contaminated mouth parts of flea
• Endotoxin and exotoxin
• Envelope antigen (F 1) inhibits phagocytosis.
• Type III secretion system suppresses cytokine production and resists phago
cytic killing
22
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
Disease(s)
• Bubonic plague
– Flea bites infected animal and then later uninfected human
– Symptoms: rapidly increasing fever, regional buboes, conjunctivitis; if
untreated, leads to septicemia and death
• Pneumonic plague
– Arises from septic pulmonary emboli in bubonic plague or inhalation of
organisms from infected individual
– Highly contagious
– Bioterrorism
– Hemoptysis, chest pain, dyspnea
Diagnosis
• Clinical specimens and cultures are hazardous
• Serodiagnosis or direct immunofluorescence
• “Safety pin” staining on blood stain (Wright or Wayson)
Treatment: aminoglycosides
Prevention: animal control and avoidance of sick/dead animals; killed vaccine
(military)
Yersinia enterocolitica KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Distinguishing Features: motile at 25.0 C (77.0 F), nonmotile at 37.0 C (98.6 F); Yersinia enterocolitica
cold growth
• Patient with inflammatory
Reservoir: zoonotic diarrhea or pseudoappendicitis
Transmission: unpasteurized milk, pork; prominent in northern climates (Michi • Cold climates
gan, Scandinavia)
• Unpasteurized milk, pork
Pathogenesis • Gram ( ) bacilli, non−lactose
• Enterotoxin, endotoxin fermenters, non−H2S producers
• Multiplies in the cold
Disease(s)
• Enterocolitis: presentations may vary with age
– Very young: febrile diarrhea (blood and pus)
– Older kids/young adults: pseudoappendicitis (also caused by Yersinia
pseudotuberculosis)
– Adults: enterocolitis with postinfective sequelae like reactive arthritis
• Blood transfusion–associated infections
22
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Diagnosis: stool culture, 25.0 C (77.0 F), cold enrichment
Treatment: supportive care; fluoroquinolone or third generation cephalosporin
for immunocompromised
GENUS: PROTEUS
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES Proteus mirabilis/Proteus vulgaris
Proteus mirabilis/Proteus vulgaris
Distinguishing Features
• Patient with UTI or septicemia
• Gram negative rods, non lactose fermenting
• Swarming motility
• Highly motile; “swarming” motility on surface of blood agar
• Staghorn renal calculi (struvite stones)
• Urease produced
• Gram ( ), non−lactose fermenting, • Facultative anaerobe (Enterobacteriaceae), oxidase negative
urease (+)
Reservoir: human colon and environment (water and soil)
Transmission: endogenous
NOTE
Pathogenesis
Weil Felix test: antigens of OX strains of
• Urease raises urine pH to cause kidney stones (staghorn renal calculi)
Proteus vulgaris cross react with rickettsial
organisms. • Motility may aid entry into bladder
• Endotoxin causes fever and shock when septicemia occurs
Disease(s): urinary tract infection; septicemia
Diagnosis: culture of blood or urine for lactose negative organisms with swarm
ing motility
Treatment: fluoroquinolone, TMP SMX, or third generation cephalosporin for
uncomplicated UTI; remove stones if present
Prevention: promptly remove urinary tract catheter
GENUS: SALMONELLA
Species of Medical Importance
There are >2,400 serotypes of Salmonella.
• S. typhi
• S. enteritidis
• S. typhimurium
• S. choleraesuis
• S. paratyphi
• S. dublin
23
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
Salmonella enterica typhi KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Salmonella typhi
Distinguishing Features
• Patient with fever, abdominal pain
• Gram negative rods, highly motile with the Vi capsule
• Travel to endemic area
• Facultative anaerobe, non–lactose fermenting
• Gram ( ), encapsulated, nonlactose
• Produces H2S
fermenter, produces H2S gas
• Species identification with biochemical reactions
• Widal test
• Sensitive to acid
Reservoir: humans only; no animal reservoirs
Transmission: fecal oral route from human carriers (gall bladder); decreased
stomach acid or impairment of mononuclear cells as in sickle cell disease
predisposes to Salmonella infection
Pathogenesis and Disease: typhoid fever (enteric fever), S. typhi (milder form:
paratyphoid fever; S. paratyphi)
• Infection begins in ileocecal region; constipation common
• Host cell membranes “ruffle” from Salmonella contact.
• Salmonella reach basolateral side of M cells, then mesenteric lymph nodes
and blood (transient 19 septicemia)
• At 1 week: patients have 80% positive blood cultures; 25% have rose spots
(trunk/abdomen), signs of septicemia (mainly fever)
• S. typhi survives intracellularly and replicates in macrophages; resistant to
macrophage killing because of decreased fusion of lysosomes with
phagosomes and defensins (proteins) allow it to withstand oxygen
dependent and oxygen independent killing
• By week 3: 85% of stool cultures are positive
• Symptoms: fever, headache, abdominal pain, constipation more common
than diarrhea
• Complications if untreated: necrosis of Peyer patches with perforation
(local endotoxin triggered damage), thrombophlebitis, cholecystitis, pneu
monia, abscess formation, etc.
Diagnosis: organisms can be isolated from blood, bone marrow, urine, and tissue
biopsy from the rose spots if present; antibodies to O, Vi, and H antigens in
patient’s serum can be detected by agglutination (Widal test)
Treatment: fluoroquinolones or third generation cephalosporins
Prevention: sanitation; 3 vaccines (attenuated oral vaccine of S. typhi strain 21
(Ty21a), parenteral heat killed S. typhi (no longer used in U.S.), and parenteral
ViCPS polysaccharide capsular vaccine)
23
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES Salmonella Subspecies other than typhi (S. enteritidis,
Salmonella enterica Subspecies Other Than S. typhimurium)
typhi
• Enterocolitis—inflammatory, follows Distinguishing Features
ingestion of poultry products or • Facultative gram negative rods, non–lactose fermenting on EMB,
handling pet reptiles MacConkey medium
• Produces H2S, motile (unlike Shigella)
• Septicemia—very young or elderly
• Speciated with biochemical reactions and serotyped with O, H, and
• Osteomyelitis—sickle cell disease
Vi antigens
• Gram ( ) bacillus, motile, non− Reservoir: enteric tracts of humans and domestic animals, e.g., chickens and
lactose fermenter, produces H2S turtles
Transmission: raw chicken and eggs in kitchen; food borne outbreaks (peanut
butter, produce, eggs); reptile pets (snakes, turtles)
Pathogenesis
• Sensitive to stomach acid (infectious dose 105 organisms)
• Lowered stomach acidity (antacids or gastrectomy) increases risk
• Endotoxin in cell wall; no exotoxin
• Invades mucosa in ileocecal region, invasive to lamina propria →
inflammation → increased PG → increased cAMP → loose diarrhea;
shallow ulceration
• Spread to septicemia not common with S. enterica subsp. enteritidis (the
most common) but may occur with others
Disease(s)
• Enterocolitis/gastroenteritis (second most common bacterial cause after
Campylobacter): 6–48 hour incubation; nausea; vomiting; only occasion
ally bloody, loose stools; fever; abdominal pain; myalgia; headache
• Septicemia (S. enterica subsp. choleraesuis, S. enterica subsp. paratyphi,
and S. enterica subsp. dublin): usually in very young or elderly when it
occurs; endocarditis or arthritis complicates 10% of cases
• Osteomyelitis: sickle cell disease predisposes to osteomyelitis; Salmonella
is most common causal agent of osteomyelitis in sickle cell disease (not
trait) patients (>80%)
Diagnosis: culture on Hektoen agar, H2S production
Treatment: antibiotics are contraindicated for self limiting gastroenteritis;
ampicillin, third generation cephalosporin, fluoroquinolone, or TMP SMX for
invasive disease
Prevention: properly cook foods and wash hands, particularly food handlers
23
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
GENUS: GARDNERELLA KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Gardnerella
Gardnerella vaginalis
• Female patient with thin vaginal
discharge
Distinguishing Features
• Post antibiotic or menses
• Gram variable rod; has Gram positive cell envelope
• Facultative anaerobe • Clue cells
• Catalase negative and oxidase negative • Whiff test
Reservoir: human vagina
Transmission: endogenous (normal flora gets disturbed, increased pH)
Pathogenesis
• Polymicrobial infections
• Works synergistically with other normal flora organisms including
Lactobacillus, Mobiluncus, Bacteroides, Peptostreptococcus
• Thought to flourish when the vaginal pH increases, reduction of vaginal
Lactobacillus
• Follows menses or antibiotic therapy
Disease: bacterial vaginosis (vaginal odor, increased discharge (thin, gray,
adherent fluid)
Diagnosis: pH >4.5, clue cells (epithelial cells covered with bacteria) on vaginal
smear; for Whiff test, add KOH to sample and assess for “fishy” amine odor
Treatment: metronidazole or clindamycin
Recall Question
Ulcers caused by Shigella species have which of the following
characteristics?
A. Are deep
B. Have granulomatous borders
C. Invade the vascular structures
D. Are shallow
Answer: D
GENUS: BACTEROIDES
Bacteroides fragilis
Distinguishing Features: anaerobic gram negative rods; modified LPS with
reduced activity
23
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES Reservoir: human colon; the genus Bacteroides is predominant anaerobe
Bacteroides fragilis
Transmission: endogenous from bowel defects (e.g., cytotoxic drug use, cancer),
surgery, or trauma
• Patient with abdominal trauma,
emergency abdominal surgery Pathogenesis: modified LPS (missing heptose and 2 keto 3 deoxyoctonate) has
reduced endotoxin activity; capsule is antiphagocytic
• Septicemia, peritonitis, abscess
Diseases: septicemia, peritonitis (often mixed infections), and abdominal
• Gram ( ) bacilli, anaerobic
abscess
Diagnosis: anaerobes are identified by biochemical tests and gas chromatography
Treatment
• Metronidazole, clindamycin, or cefoxitin; abscesses should be surgically
drained
• Antibiotic resistance common (penicillin G, some cephalosporins, and
aminoglycosides); 7−10% of all strains now clindamycin resistant
Prevention: prophylactic antibiotics for GI or biliary tract surgery
Porphyromonas, Prevotella, Fusobacterium spp.
Distinguishing Features: Gram negative rods, anaerobic, normal oral flora
Transmission: endogenous
Pathogenesis: Porphyromonas has gingipains: act as proteases, adhesins, degrades
IgG antibodies and inflammatory cytokines
Disease: periodontal disease
Diagnosis: anaerobic, gram negative rods isolated from abscess
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Treatment: metronidazole
Treponema pallidum
• Sexually active patient or neonate of
SPIROCHETES
IV drug using female
• Primary: nontender, indurated genital
GENUS: TREPONEMA
chancre
• Secondary: maculopapular, copper Treponema pallidum
colored rash, condylomata lata
Distinguishing Features
• Tertiary: gummas in CNS and
cardiovascular system • Thin spirochete, not reliably seen on Gram stain (basically a gram negative
cell envelope)
• Spirillar, gram ( ) bacteria visualized
• Outer membrane has endotoxin like lipids
by dark field or fluorescent antibody
• Axial filaments = endoflagella = periplasmic flagella
• Specific and nonspecific serologic
• Cannot culture in clinical lab; serodiagnosis
tests
• Is an obligate pathogen (but not intracellular)
Reservoir: human genital tract
23
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
Transmission: transmitted sexually or across the placenta
Pathogenesis: disease characterized by endarteritis resulting in lesions; strong
tendency to chronicity
Table II 2 22. Stages of Syphilis
Stage Clinical Diagnosis
Primary (10 d to 3 mo post Nontender chancre; clean, indu Fluorescent microscopy of lesion
exposure) rated edge; contagious; heals 50% of patients will be negative by
spontaneously 3−6 weeks nonspecific serology
Secondary (1 to 3 mo later) Maculopapular (copper colored) Serology nonspecific and specific;
rash, diffuse, includes palms and both positive
soles, patchy alopecia
Condylomata lata: flat, wartlike
perianal and mucous membrane
lesions; highly infectious
Latent None Positive serology
Tertiary (30% of untreated, years Gummas (syphilitic granulomas), Serology: specific tests Nonspe
later) aortitis, CNS inflammation (tabes cific may be negative
dorsalis)
Congenital (babies of IV drug users) Stillbirth, keratitis, 8th nerve Serology: should revert to negative
damage, notched teeth; most born within 3 mo of birth if uninfected
asymptomatic or with rhinitis →
widespread desquamating
maculopapular rash
Diagnosis
• Visualize organisms by immunofluorescence or microscopy (dark field
microscopy was standard but no longer used)
• Serology important: 2 types of antibody:
– Nontreponemal antibody (= reagin) screening tests
o Ab binds to cardiolipin: antigen found in mammalian mitochondrial
membranes and treponemes; cheap source of antigen is cow heart,
used in screening tests (VDRL, RPR, ART); very sensitive in primary
(except early) and secondary syphilis; titer may decline in tertiary and
with treatment; not specific so confirm with FTA ABS
o Examples: venereal disease research lab (VDRL), rapid plasma reagin
(RPR), automated reagin test (ART), recombinant antigen test (ICE)
– Specific tests for treponemal antibody (more expensive)
o Earliest antibodies; bind to spirochetes: these tests are more specific
and positive earlier; usually remain positive for life, but positive in
those with other treponemal diseases (bejel) and may be positive in
Lyme disease; fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption (FTA
ABS; most widely used test); Treponema pallidum microhemaggluti
nation (MHA TP)
23
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Treatment
• Benzathine penicillin (long acting form) for primary and secondary syphi
lis (no resistance to penicillin); penicillin G for congenital and late syphilis
• Jarisch Herxheimer reaction: starts during first 24 hours of antibiotic treat
ment; increased temperature and decreased BP; rigors, leukopenia; may
occur during treatment of any spirochete disease
Prevention: benzathine penicillin given to contacts; no vaccine available
GENUS: BORRELIA
Genus Features
• Larger spirochetes
• Gram negative
• Microaerophilic
• Difficult to culture
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES Borrelia burgdorferi
Borrelia burgdorferi Reservoir: white footed mice (nymphs) and white tailed deer (adult ticks)
• Patient with influenza like symptoms Transmission: Ixodes (deer) ticks and nymphs; worldwide but in 3 main areas of
and erythema migrans U.S.:
• Spring/summer seasons • Ixodes scapularis (I. dammini) in Northeast (e.g., Connecticut), Midwest
(e.g., Wisconsin, Minnesota)
• Northeast, Midwest, West Coast
• Ixodes pacificus on West Coast (e.g., California)
• Later: neurologic, cardiac, arthritis/
• Late spring/early summer incidence
arthralgias
Pathogenesis: B. burgdorferi invades skin and spreads via bloodstream to involve
primarily the heart, joints, and CNS; arthritis is caused by immune complexes
Disease: Lyme disease (#1 vector borne disease in U.S.)
Stage 1: early localized (3 Target rash
days to 1 month)
Flu like symptoms
Stage 2: early disseminated Swollen lymph nodes
(days to weeks)
Secondary annular skin lesions
(organism spreads hematog
Bell palsy, headache, meningitis,
enously)
extreme fatigue, conjunctivitis
Palpitations, arrhythmias, myocarditis,
pericarditis
Stage 3: late persistent Arthritis (mostly knees), immune
(months to years) complex mediated
23
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
Diagnosis: serodiagnosis by ELISA (negative early); Western blot for
confirmation
Treatment: doxycycline, amoxicillin, or azithromycin/clarithromycin for primary
(even in children); ceftriaxone for secondary; doxycycline or ceftriaxone for arthritis
Prevention: DEET; avoid tick bites; vaccine (OspA flagellar antigen) not used in U.S.
Borrelia recurrentis and B. hermsii
Distinguishing Features: spirochetes, cause relapsing fever
Transmission: human body louse for B. recurrentis; soft ticks from mice for B.
hermsii (and 13 other species of Borrelia)
Pathogenesis: antigenic variation leads to return of fever/chills
Disease(s): relapsing fever (tick borne relapsing fever in U.S. is caused mainly by
B. hermsii); associated with camping in rural areas of Colorado
Diagnosis: spirochetes seen on dark field microscopy of blood smear when
patient is febrile
Treatment: doxycycline; Jarisch Herxheimer reaction possible
Recall Question
Which of the following bacteria is the most common cause of
osteomyelitis in sickle cell disease?
A. Escherichia coli
B. Salmonella enterica
C. Staphylococcus aureus
D. Yersinia enterocolitica
Answer: B
GENUS: LEPTOSPIRA
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Leptospira interrogans
Distinguishing Features: spirochetes with tight terminal hooks or coils (seen on Leptospira interrogans
dark field microscopy but not light; can be cultured in vitro; aerobic); generally
• Patients with influenza like symptoms
diagnosed by serology
± GI symptoms
Reservoir: wild and domestic animals (zoonosis)
• Occupational or recreational exposure
to water aerosols
Transmission
• Contact with animal urine in water; organism penetrates mucous mem • Hawaii
branes or enters small breaks in epidermis
• Spirochetes with terminal hoo
• In U.S., via dog, livestock, and rat urine through contaminated recre
ational waters (jet skiers) or occupational exposure (sewer workers)
• Hawaii highest incidence state
237
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Pathogenesis: no toxins or virulence factors known
Disease: leptospirosis (swineherd’s disease, swamp or mud fever); influenza like
disease ± GI tract symptoms (Weil disease); if not treated, can progress to
hepatitis and renal failure
Diagnosis: serodiagnosis (agglutination test); culture (blood, CSF, urine) available
in few labs; dark field microscopy insensitive
Treatment: penicillin G or doxycycline
Prevention: doxycycline for short term exposure; vaccination of domestic
livestock and pets; rat control
UNUSUAL BACTERIA
Table II 2 23. Comparison of Chlamydiaceae, Rickettsiaceae, and Mycoplasmataceae with Typical Bacteria
Typical Bacteria
(S. aureus) Chlamydiaceae Rickettsiaceae Mycoplasmataceae
Obligate intracellu Mostly no Yes Yes No
lar parasite?
Make ATP? Normal ATP No ATP Limited ATP Normal ATP
Peptidoglycan layer Normal Modified* Normal No peptidoglycan
in cell envelope? peptidoglycan peptidoglycan peptidoglycan
*Chlamydial peptidoglycan lacks muramic acid and is considered by some as modified, by others as absent.
FAMILY: CHLAMYDIACEAE
Family Features
• Obligate intracellular bacteria
• Elementary body/reticulate body
• Not seen on Gram stain
• Cannot make ATP
• Cell wall lacks muramic acid
Genera of Medical Importance
• Chlamydia trachomatis
• Chlamydophila pneumoniae
• Chlamydophila psittaci
23
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
Chlamydia trachomatis KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Distinguishing Features Chlamydia trachomatis
• Obligate intracellular bacterium; cannot make ATP • Sexually active patient or neonate
• Found in cells as metabolically active, replicating reticulate bodies • Adult: urethritis, cervicitis, PID,
• Infective form: inactive, extracellular elementary body inclusion conjunctivitis
• Not seen on Gram stain; peptidoglycan layer lacks muramic acid • Neonate: inclusion conjunctivitis/
pneumonia
Reservoir: human genital tract and eyes
• Immigrant from Africa/Asia, genital
Transmission: sexual contact and at birth; trachoma is transmitted by hand to
lymphadenopathy
eye contact and flies.
• Cytoplasmic inclusion bodies in
Pathogenesis: infection of nonciliated columnar or cuboidal epithelial cells of
mucosal surfaces leads to granulomatous response and damage. scrapings
Diseases
• STDs in U.S.
– Serotypes D K (most common bacterial STD in U.S., though overall
herpes and HPV are more common in prevalence)
– Nongonococcal urethritis, cervicitis, PID, and major portion of infer
tility (no resistance to reinfection)
– Inclusion conjunctivitis in adults (with NGU and reactive arthritis)
– Inclusion conjunctivitis and/or pneumonia in neonates/infants (stac
cato cough) with eosinophilic infiltrate
• Lymphogranuloma venereum
– Serotypes L1, 2, 3 (prevalent in Africa, Asia, South America); painless
ulcer at site of contact; swollen lymph nodes (buboes) around inguinal
ligament (groove sign); tertiary includes ulcers, fistulas, genital elephan
tiasis
• Trachoma
– Leading cause of preventable infectious blindness: serotypes A, B, Ba,
and C
– Follicular conjunctivitis leading to conjunctival scarring, and inturned
eyelashes leading to corneal scarring and blindness
Diagnosis
• NAAT; DNA probes in U.S. (rRNA) and PCR
• Cytoplasmic inclusions seen on Giemsa , iodine , or fluorescent
antibody stained smear or scrapings
• Cannot be cultured on inert media
• Is cultured in tissue cultures or embryonated eggs
• Serodiagnosis: DFA, ELISA
Treatment: azithromycin or doxycycline
Prevention: erythromycin for infected mothers to prevent neonatal disease;
systemic erythromycin for neonatal conjunctivitis to prevent pneumonia
23
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES GENUS: CHLAMYDOPHILA
Chlamydophila
• C. pneumoniae: atypical Table II 2 24. Diseases Caused by Chlamydophila Species
pneumonia: sputum with
Organism C. pneumoniae C. psittaci
intracytoplasmic inclusions
Distinguishing Potential association with No glycogen in inclusion
• C. psittaci: atypical pneumonia: characteristics atherosclerosis bodies
exposure to parrots
Reservoir Human respiratory tract Birds, parrots, turkeys
(major U.S. reservoir)
Transmission Respiratory droplets Dust of dried bird
secretions and feces
Pathogenesis Intracellular growth; infects Intracellular growth
smooth muscle, endothe
lial cells, or coronary
artery and macrophages
Disease Atypical “walking” pneumo Psittacosis (ornithosis);
nia; single lobe; bronchitis; atypical pneumonia with
scant sputum, prominent hepatitis, possible CNS
dry cough and hoarse and GI symptoms
ness; sinusitis
Diagnosis Serology (complement Serology, complement
fixation or microimmuno fixation
fluorescence) Cold Cold agglutinin negative
agglutinin negative
Treatment Macrolides and Doxycycline
tetracycline
Prevention None Avoid birds
GENUS: RICKETTSIA
Table II 2 25. Infections Caused by Rickettsiae and Close Relatives
Group Disease Bacterium Arthropod Vector Reservoir Host
Rocky Mountain R. rickettsii Ticks Ticks, dogs, rodents
Spotted Fever
Epidemic Typhus R. prowazekii Human louse Humans
Endemic Typhus R. typhi Flea Rodents
Scrub Typhus Orientia Mites Rodents
tsutsugamushi
Ehrlichiosis E. chaffeensis Tick Small mammals
A. phagocytophilum
24
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
Genus Features
• Aerobic, gram negative bacilli (too small to stain well with Gram stain)
• Obligate intracellular bacteria (do not make sufficient ATP for indepen
dent life)
Species of Medical Importance
• Rickettsia rickettsii
• Rickettsia prowazekii
• Rickettsia typhi
• Orientia tsutsugamushi (formerly R. tsutsugamushi)
• Ehrlichia spp.
• Coxiella burnetii
Rickettsia rickettsii KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Reservoir: small wild rodents and larger wild and domestic animals (dogs) Rickettsia rickettsii
Transmission: hard ticks: Dermacentor (also reservoir hosts because of trans • Patient with influenza like symptoms
ovarian transmission) and petechial rash that begins on
ankles and wrists and moves to trunk
Pathogenesis: invade endothelial cells lining capillaries, causing vasculitis in
many organs including brain, liver, skin, lungs, kidney, and GI tract • East Coast mountainous areas
Disease: Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF) • Spring/summer seasons
• Prevalent on East Coast (OK, TN, NC, SC); 2–12 day incubation • Outdoor exposure
• Headache, fever (38.8 C [102.0 F]), malaise, myalgias, toxicity, vomiting, • Weil Felix (+)
and confusion
• Rash (maculopapular → petechial) starts (by day 6 of illness) on ankles
and wrists and then spreads to the trunk, palms, soles, and face
(centripetal rash)
• Ankle and wrist swelling also occur
• Diagnosis may be confused by GI symptoms, periorbital swelling, stiff neck,
conjunctivitis, and arthralgias
Diagnosis
• Clinical symptoms (above) and tick bite
• Start treatment without laboratory confirmation
• Serological IFA test most widely used; fourfold increase in titer is
diagnostic
• Weil Felix test (cross reaction of Rickettsia antigens with OX strains of
Proteus vulgaris) is no longer used (but may still be asked!)
Treatment: doxycycline, even in children age <8 years
Prevention: tick protection and prompt removal; doxycycline for exposed persons
24
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Recall Question
Diagnosis of Lyme disease is done with which of the following?
A. Doxycycline treatment challenge
B. Skin biopsy
C. Skin inspection for tick bite
D. Serodiagnosis by ELISA followed by Western blot
Answer: D
GENUS: EHRLICHIA
Genus Features
• Gram negative bacilli
• Obligate intracellular bacteria of mononuclear or granulocytic phagocytes
Species of Medical Importance
• Ehrlichia chaffeensis
• Anaplasma phagocytophilum
Ehrlichia chaffeensis/Anaplasma phagocytophilum
Table II 2 26. Diseases Caused by Ehrlichia Species
Organism Reservoir Transmission Pathogenesis Disease Diagnosis Treatment
E. chaffeensis Ticks Lone star tick Infects Ehrlichiosis (mono IFA Doxycyclin
and (Amblyomma) monocytes cytic) similar to RMSF
PCR
deer and macro without rash; leuk
Blood film
phages openia, low platelets,
morulae Morulae
A. phagocytophilum Ticks, Ixodes ticks Infects Ehrlichiosis (granulo IFA Doxycycline
deer, Coinfection neutrophils cytic) similar to RMSF
PCR
mice with Borrelia without rash; leuko
Blood film
penia, low platelets,
morulae Morulae
Disease
• Similar to Rocky Mountain spotted fever but generally without rash
• Leukopenia
• Thrombocytopenia
• Morulae: mulberry like structures inside infected cells
Diagnosis: Giemsa stained blood film (morulae); serology; DNA probe
Treatment: doxycycline (begin before lab confirmation)
Prevention: no vaccine, avoid ticks
242
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
Coxiella burnetii KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Distinguishing Features: obligate intracellular, spore like characteristics Ehrlichia chaffeensis/Anaplasma
phagocytophilum
Transmission: inhalation from dried placental material; zoonosis (sheep and
goats); possible bioterrorism agent • Patient with influenza like symptoms,
no rash, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia
Pathogenesis: obligate intracellular, live inside phagolysosomes
• Same geographic range as Lyme
Disease(s): Q fever: atypical pneumonia, hepatitis, or endocarditis
disease
Diagnosis: serologic detection of Phase II LPS antigen (for acute disease) and
• Spring/summer seasons
Phase I and Phase II LPS antigens (for chronic disease)
• Exposure to outdoors
Treatment: doxycycline
• Morulae inside monocytes or
Recall Question granulocyte
Which of the following is a disease in neonates caused by
Chlamydia trachomatis?
A. Inclusion conjunctivitis
B. Gastroenteritis
C. Neonatal cataract
D. Urinary tract infection
Answer: A
FAMILY: MYCOPLASMATACEAE
Family Features
• Smallest free living (extracellular) bacteria
• Missing peptidoglycan (no cell wall)
• Sterols in membrane
• Require cholesterol for in vitro culture
• “Fried egg” colonies on Mycoplasma or Eaton’s media
Genera of Medical Importance
• Mycoplasma pneumoniae
• Ureaplasma urealyticum
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Distinguishing Features
• Young adult with atypical pneumonia
• Extracellular, tiny, flexible
• No cell wall; not seen on Gram stained smear • Mulberry shaped colonies on media
containing sterols
• Membrane with cholesterol but does not synthesize cholesterol
• Requires cholesterol for in vitro culture • Positive cold agglutinin test
243
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Reservoir: human respiratory tract
Transmission: respiratory droplets; close contact: families, military recruits,
medical school classes, college dorms
Pathogenesis
• Surface parasite: not invasive
• Attaches to respiratory epithelium via P1 protein
• Inhibits ciliary action
• Produces hydrogen peroxide, superoxide radicals, and cytolytic
enzymes, which damage the respiratory epithelium, leading to necrosis
and a bad, hacking cough (walking pneumonia)
• M. pneumoniae functions as superantigen, elicits production of IL 1, IL 6,
and TNF α
Disease: walking pneumonia
• Pharyngitis
• May develop into atypical pneumonia with persistent hack (little sputum
produced)
• Most common atypical pneumonia (along with viruses) in young adults
Diagnosis
• Primarily clinical diagnosis; PCR/nucleic acid probes
• ELISA and immunofluorescence sensitive and specific
• Fried egg shaped colonies on sterol containing media, 10 days
• Positive cold agglutinins (autoantibody to RBCs) test is nonspecific and is
positive in only 65% of cases
Treatment: erythromycin, azithromycin, clarithromycin; no cephalosporin or
penicillin
Prevention: none
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES Ureaplasma urealyticum
Ureaplasma urealyticum Distinguishing Features: member of family Mycoplasmataceae
• Adult patient with urethritis, prostatitis, Pathogenesis: urease positive
renal calculi
Diseases: urethritis, prostatitis, renal calculi
• Alkaline urine
Diagnosis: non Gram staining, urease(+)
• Non–Gram staining, urease (+)
Treatment: erythromycin or tetracycline
24
CHAPTER 2 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT BACTERIA
Recall Question
The rash caused by Rickettsia rickettsii develops in which of the
following patterns?
A. Ankles and wrists to trunk
B. Chest to arms
C. Face to body
D. Tongue to mouth
Answer: A
24

Bacterial Genetics 3#
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Explain how DNA is rearranged within a bacterium
❏ Answer questions about bacterial gene transfer, mechanisms of
bacterial DNA exchange and conjugal crosses
❏ Demonstrate understanding of drug resistance
❏ Explain information related to antibiotic susceptibility testing
BACTERIAL GENETIC MATERIAL
Three types of DNA may be found in a bacterial cell: bacterial chromosomal DNA,
plasmid DNA, or bacteriophage DNA that is integrated into the bacterial genome.
Bacterial Chromosome (Genome) DNA
Most bacteria have only 1 chromosome but there are often multiple copies of it
in the cell. Most bacterial chromosomes are a large, covalently closed, circular
DNA molecule.
• The chromosome is organized into loops around a proteinaceous center.
A single stranded topoisomerase (1 nick) will relax only the nicked loop,
allowing DNA synthesis or transcription.
• Most have around 2,000 genes.
• All essential genes are on the bacterial chromosome.
Bacterial
DNA
Linker
Proteins
Figure II 3 1. The Bacterial Chromosome
Figure II 3 1. Bacterial Chromosome
24
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Plasmid DNA
Plasmids are extrachromosomal genetic elements found in bacteria (and
eukaryotes).
• Generally covalently closed, circular DNA
• Small (1.5–400 kB)
• Can replicate autonomously in bacterial cells
One subclass of plasmids, episomes, may be integrated into the bacterial DNA.
Episomes have insertion sequences matching those on the bacterial chromosome.
Plasmids carry the genetic material for a variety of genes, e.g., the fertility genes
directing conjugation (tra operon), many genes for antibiotic resistance, and most
bacterial exotoxins. They contain genes that are nonessential for bacterial life.
Bacteriophage DNA (= Phage = Bacterial Virus) Genome
Stable pieces of bacteriophage DNA may be present in the bacterial cell. These
are generally repressed temperate phage (called prophage) inserted into the
bacterial chromosome.
• Besides the repressor protein, prophage DNA may also direct synthesis of
other proteins. Most notable are gene products that make bacteria more
pathogenic.
• This enhanced virulence is called lysogenic conversion.
GENE TRANSFER
Bacterial reproduction is by the asexual process of binary fission. With the
exception of a de novo mutation, the resultant daughter cells are genetically
identical to the parent cell. This lends itself to the question, “How then have
bacteria undergone genetic variation resulting in the different virulence factors
and antibiotic resistances?”
Three mechanisms have been observed to transfer novel genetic material into
bacteria: transformation, conjugation, and transduction.
Upon reception of the new genes, the genetic material must be stabilized by either
reformation of a plasmid or recombination. Linear DNA is always stabilized by
homologous recombination.
Occasionally, a plasmid will be an episome and integrate into the bacterial
chromosome by the process of site specific recombination.
24
CHAPTER 3 | BACTERIAL GENETICS
Transformation
Transformation is the uptake of naked (free) DNA from the environment by
competent cells.
• Cells become competent (able to bind short pieces of DNA to the enve
lope and import them into the cell) under certain environmental condi
tions (which you do not need to know).
• Some bacteria are capable of natural transformation (they are naturally
competent): Haemophilus influenzae, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Bacillus
species, and Neisseria species.
• DNA (released from dead cells) is taken up.
• Newly introduced DNA is generally linear, homologous DNA; a similar
type of cell but perhaps one that is genetically diverse.
• The linear DNA is then stabilized by homologous recombination.
Free DNA from
dead cell
Bacterial
chromosome RecA
Certain Stabilization
growth of some genes
conditions by homologous
recombination
1 Non competent, 2 Competent cell now 3 DNA uptake 4 Now smooth
rough (non able to bind DNA (encapsulated)
encapsulated) and pathogenic
Streptococcus Streptococcus
pneumoniae pneumoniae
Figure II 3 2. Transformation of a Nonencapsulated Streptococcus Pneumoniae
Figure II 3 5. Transformation
Homologous Recombination
Homologous recombination is a gene exchange process that may stabilize genes
introduced into a cell by transformation, conjugation, or transduction. Imported
bacterial genes (transferred into a cell by transformation, conjugation, or transduc
tion) are on short linear pieces of DNA called exogenotes. Linear DNA is not
stable in cells because it is broken down by exonucleases.
• Produces an “exchange”of DNA between the linear exogenote of DNA and
a homologous region on the stable (circular) bacterial chromosome
• Requires several genes worth of homology or near homology between the
DNA strands, plus a series of recombination enzymes/factors coded for by
the recombination genes recA, recB, recC, and recD (with recA an absolute
requirement)
24
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
+ + a+
RecA a–b–RecA gene RecA
a+ product = b+
b+
c+ Homologous a–b–c+
d+ recombination d+
Exogenote
Genes ending up on the linear piece of DNA are lost. Those on the circular
molecule become part of the cell’s permanent genetic makeup.
Figure II 3 2. Homologous Recombination
Figure II 3 3. Homologous Recombination
Conjugation
Conjugation is gene transfer from one bacterial cell to another involving direct
cell to cell contact. In a conjugal mating, a donor cell will transfer a single strand
of DNA to a recipient cell. Donor cells contain fertility factors that encode for gene
products involved in conjugation. There are 2 types of donor cell:
• F+ cells: fertility factors in a plasmid
• Hfr cells: fertility factors in an episome
All recipient cells are devoid of fertility factor.
tra
tra
F–F+ Hfr
(Recipient) (Donor) (Donor)
High Frequency
Recombinant
Figure II 3 4. Mating Types of Bacteria
Figure II 3 7. Mating Types of Bacteria
25
CHAPTER 3 | BACTERIAL GENETICS
Donor (male) cells: F+ and Hfr cells
All donor cells have fertility plasmids known as F factors. F factors control
conjugation through a series of important “fertility” genes called the transfer or
tra region. The tra region code for the following:
• Sex pili (play a role in establishing cell to cell contact)
• Genes whose products stabilize mating pairs
• Genes that direct conjugal DNA transfer, and other genes
Donor cells have a region called oriT (origin of transfer), where a single strand
break in the DNA will be made and then oriT begins the transfer of one strand of
the double helix. Many have insertion sequences, where the plasmid can be
inserted into the bacterial chromosome, combining to make one larger molecule
of DNA.
Insertion
Sequence
tra operon has many genes;
most important:
9
10 1. Sex pili (proteins & assembly)
8
2. Conjugal DNA metabolism
11
3. etc.
7 This is where site
specific integration may 12 Later in notes:
integrate the fertility
6 tra
factor into the bacterial
chromosome to create 13
an Hfr cell.
5 oriT
14
F factor
4
1 oriT = origin of transfer
3
2 A single strand break occurs here.
This is where transfer of the single
strand begins; the other strand
remains and it is quickly restored
to double strandedness. A plasmid
must have this region to be
transferrable by conjugation.
Figure II 3 6. Fertility Factor
Figure II 3 5. Genetic Map of a Fertility (F)
• Donor cells in which the fertility plasmid is in its free state are called F+
cells.
• Donor cells in which the fertility factor has inserted itself into the
bacterial chromosome are called Hfr cells. An integrated plasmid is called
an episome.
Recipient (female) cells: F cells
Recipient cells lack fertility factors. In every cross, one cell must be an F cell.
25
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Site Specific Recombination
Site specific recombination is the integration of one DNA molecule into another
DNA molecule with which it has no homology except for a small site on each
DNA (called an attachment, integration, or insertion site).
• Requires restriction endonucleases and restriction endonuclease sites on
each DNA
• Because this process integrates rather than exchanges pieces of DNA, the
end result is a molecule the sum of the 2 original molecules.
a+
b+
c+ Site specific a+
d+ recombination d c++ b+
= Integration sites
Figure II 3 3. Site Specific Recombination
Figure II 3 6. Site Specific Recombination
NOTE There are 3 major roles of site specific integration:
Transposition is the name of site specific • Integration of a fertility factor to make an Hfr cell
integration of transposons.
• Integration of temperate phage DNA into a bacterial chromosome to
create a prophage
• Movement and insertion of transposons
Recall Question
Transformation is the uptake of which structure from the
environment?
A. Bound DNA
B. Bound proteins
C. Bound RNA
D. Free DNA
E. Free RNA
Answer: D
25
CHAPTER 3 | BACTERIAL GENETICS
CONJUGAL CROSSES
sex pilus
1 In the male or F+ parent, the fertility factor is present
but free from the bacterial chromosome. Transfer is
uni directional from male to female. OriT, as in every
−
d+ a+ d− a cross, will be transferred first and then the rest of the
c b+ c− b− plasmid genes.
tra
oriT
F+ cell F–cell
2 Only a single strand of the plasmid DNA duplex is
transferred. The strand that is lost is reduplicated
so that the donor always stays the same genotype.
d+ a+ d− a − The last genes to be transferred are the tra region.
c b+ c − b−
3 The transfer of the plasmid is fairly quick so assume
it is transferred in its entirety 100% of the time unless
otherwise told.
−
d+ a+ d− a
c b+ c − b− Note that the F–cell undergoes a sex change,
becoming F+ (male). These two F+ cells can no
tra
longer mate, and no BACTERIAL genes are
tra
transferred.
oriT
oriT
F+ F+ cell with
Cell (unchanged) new plasmid but no
new bacterial genes
Figure II 3 8. ThFeigureF+ IIby3 F7.− FC+onjubgyalF ConjCurgoasls Cross
25
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Integrated Fertility Factor
Bacterial genes are represented as bac## to remind you that there are generally
several thousand bacterial genes and that this molecule of DNA is very large.
bac1800 bac2000
IS2
The physical linkage of the fertility factor to the bacterial chromosome promotes 8
transfer of bacterial genes in a linear order with those bacterial genes closest to the
insertion site being transferred with the highest frequency and the frequency of transfer of the
others proportional to their distance from the insertion site.
• The first half of the fertility factor (including oriT but not including the tra region) is
transferred along with a few bacterial genes before the conjugation event is disrupted by tra
Brownian motion.
bac
1500
• For the entire genome of E. coli and both halves of the fertility factor to be transferred
would take nearly two hours. For the purpose of the exam, unless otherwise indicated,
assume that fewer than twenty bacterial genes are transferred and that the end of the
fertility factor bearing the tra region is not transferred. 14
• Again transfer is unilateral (from Hfr cell to F–cell).
oriT
• Again donor genotype remains same because only one of the two strands of part of the
plasmid DNA and bacterial chromosome is transferred with the remaining strand restored
1
immediately to double strandedness.
2
• The recipient does not get the tra region so does not become Hfr.
3
• However, the recipient does get some new copies of the chromosomal genes and some of
these may be stabilized.
4
5
bac 6
1000
7
bac30
IS1
bac1
bac20 bac4
Figure II 3 8. Hfr Chromosome (Bacterial Chromosome with Integrated FFactor)
Figure II 3 9. The Hfr Chromosome (Bacterial Chromosome with Integrated F Factor)
25
CHAPTER 3 | BACTERIAL GENETICS
Conjugation: 2nd type of cross Hfr × F−
1 2
tra region
oriT
oriT
1
7 a+
tra b+ b+ a+
a+ a− a−
dc b+++ d− c − b− c+ 7 d− c − b−
d+
1
oriT
Hfr a+b+c+d+ × F−a−b−c−d−
Fertility factor is integrated into the bacterial
chromosome. In this cross oriT and the first
As with the F+ × F− cross, only a single strand
half of the fertility factor (regions 1–7 on the
of the DNA duplex is transferred. The area that is
F factor) will be transferred first (and in that
lost is reduplicated so that the donor always stays
order) and then the bacterial genes in the
the same genotype. The last genes to be transferred
linear order away from the plasmid.
would be the tra region.
3 4
oriT oriT oriT
a+ a+
tra b+ tra b+
d− a+
c+ c+ c−b+
a−
d+ d− d+
c−b− a+ a−
c+ b−
c+ b+
It takes approximately 2 hours for a
Hfr cell F− cell
complete transfer to occur. Because the
(unchanged) with new
cytoplasmic bridge and DNA strand is so
bacterial genes:
fine, mating is normally interrupted before
a+ and b+
the transfer is complete.
(no sex change)
For the purpose of exam, assume that
mating is interrupted and the recipient gets
some new genes but does not become Hfr.
Figure II 3 10. The Hfr by F− Conjugal Cross
Figure II 3 9. Hfr by F Conjugal Cross
25
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Transduction
Transduction is the transfer of bacterial DNA by a phage vector.
During transduction, the phage picks up the bacterial DNA through an error in
phage production.
• A generalized transducing phage is produced when the phage with a lytic
life cycle puts a piece of bacterial DNA into its head. All bacterial genes
have an equal chance of being transduced.
• Specialized transduction can occur when an error is made in the life
cycle of a temperate (lysogenic) phage. Temperate phage introduce their
genomic DNA into the bacterial chromosome at a specific site and then
excise it later to complete their life cycle. If errors are made during the
excision process, then bacterial chromosomal DNA can be carried along
into the next generation of viruses.
In order to understand transduction, it is essential to understand what a bacterio
phage is and how it replicates. A bacteriophage (sometimes called phage or
bacterial virus) is a virus that infects bacterial cells.
There are 2 types of phage:
• Virulent phage infect bacterial cells, always making more virus and lysing
the cells (lytic replication).
• Temperate phage often infect without lysing the cells because they have
the ability to repress active phage replication and to stably integrate their
DNA into the bacterial chromosome. In the absence of functional repres
sor protein, they also may replicate lytically.
Bacteriophage
Virulent Temperate
Lytic
(general transduction)
Induction
Lysogenic Lyti
(specialized transduction)
Figure II 3 10. Major Types of Bacteriophage
Lytic infection
Lytic infection, by phage or viruses, leads to the production of viruses and their
release by cell lysis.
• Virulent viruses can only go into lytic life cycles and can accidentally
carry out generalized transduction.
• The lytic (or productive) life cycle of virulent phage is entirely normal
except for a mistaken incorporation of bacterial DNA into one phage head,
creating a transducing virus.
256
CHAPTER 3 | BACTERIAL GENETICS
O
MP
LE
TE S
TH E V RIU L FIE CY CLE
C
Phage adsorbs to specific cellular
receptors and injects DNA into cell.
Cell Bacterial DNA Phage DNA
#1
Early transcription/translation of phage DNA to convert
cell to a phage factory and to replicate phage DNA
Phage DNA
early mRNAs
early proteins
Following replication of DNA, phage structural
proteins are replicated at a higher rate
Phage DNA
Assembly of phage (morphogenesis) and release of phage by cell lysis.
Normal infective
(non transducing) phage
This one phage has incorporated a piece of bacterial DNA by mistake. It is called a
transducing phage. It is a generalized transducing phage because every gene had an
equal chance of being incorporated. When it infects another similar cell, it takes bacterial
genes from cell #1 to cell #2, creating the opportunity for new combinations of genes.
Generalized Transduction
recA gene product
Bacterial
DNA from
Cell #1
Cell #2 New combinations are possible if homologous
recombination produces allelic exchange.
Figure II 3 11. Generalized Transduction as an Accident of the Lytic Virus Life Cycle
Figure II 3 11. Generalized Transduction as an Accident of Lytic Virus Life Cycle
257
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Recall Question
Site specific recombination requires which of the following factors?
A. Free DNA
B. Homologous recombination
C. Restriction endonucleases
D. Sex pili
Answer: C
Temperate Phage
Phage that have both options (lytic replication or lysogeny) are called temperate
phage. When a temperate phage first infects a cell, there is a regulatory race which
determines whether the repressor is made fast enough to prevent synthesis of
phage components. The lysogenized cell will replicate to produce 2 identical cells,
each with a prophage as long as the repressor gene product is present.
Lysogeny
Temperate phage may become prophage (DNA stably integrated) or replicate
lytically.
• When repressor is made, temperate phage inserts its DNA into the
bacterial chromosome where it stably stays as a prophage.
• Lysogeny is the state of a bacterial cell with a stable phage DNA (generally
integrated into the bacterial DNA), not undergoing lytic replication
because it is repressed or defective. When the cell DNA replicates, the
phage DNA also replicates and, as long as the repressor protein is not
damaged, the lysogenic state continues ad infinitum. Defective phage (or
defective viruses in the human equivalent) cannot go into an active
replication unless a helper virus is present.
• If the repressor gene gets mutated or the repressor protein gets damaged,
then the prophage gets excised from the bacterial DNA and is induced into
the lytic production of virus. On rare occasions, these temperate phage
can produce either specialized or generalized transducing viruses. Lambda
phage of E. coli is the best studied. Most temperate phages have only a
single insertion site.
• Lambda inserts ONLY between E. coli genes gal and bio.
25
CHAPTER 3 | BACTERIAL GENETICS
Lambda DNA was
injected and has
circularized.
If lambda repressor is
made quickly enough,
active phage
production is inhibited
= Lambda
repressor
bio+
Lambda phage
gal+ Lambda DNA
bio+ production is
inserts itself
repressed but the
lambda DNA
only between bio gal+ replicates every time
and gal genes. the E. coli DNA
replicates.
= Integration sites called att in lambda Lysogenized Lambda
Figure FigurIeI 3II123. 12.LysoLgyensoygeny
Lysogeny can confer new properties on a genus such as toxin production or
antigens (lysogenic conversion). It is a model for retrovirus provirus, allowing for
specialized transduction.
To remember phage mediated pathogenic factors, remember the mnemonic
COBEDS:
• Cholera toxin
• Presence of specific prophage in Salmonella can affect O antigens
• Phage CE β or DE β cause Clostridium botulinum to produce botulinum
toxin
• Exotoxins A–C (erythrogenic or pyogenic) of Streptococcus pyogenes
• Prophage beta causes Corynebacterium diphtheriae to make diphtheria
toxin
• Shiga toxin
Induction
If the repressor is damaged (by UV, cold, or alkylating agents), then the prophage
is excised and the cell goes into lytic replication phase. This process is called
induction.
Most of the time the process is carried out perfectly, recreating the figure 8 of
DNA that was the product of viral site specific recombination, and normal
(nontransducing) phage are produced.
25
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
= damaged
lambda
repressor
Phage
Excision
production
normal
(no error)
Normal
lambda
Figure II 3 13. Normal Excision of a Lysogenic Phage
Figure II 3 13. Normal Excision of a Lysogenic Phage
Rarely, in the excision process, an excisional error is made, one of the bacterial
genes next to the insertion site is removed and attached to the lambda DNA,
and a little bit of lambda DNA is left behind. Only genes on one side or the other
side of the virus insertion site can be incorporated by excisional error.
= damaged
lambda
repressor
bio+
gal+
Phage
Excision
λdgal+
error:
gal+ production
picking up
bacterial gene
into phage DNA
Figure FigurIeI 3 II14.3 14E.xcisEioxncision EErrrororr ofofaaLysLoygseongicenic Phage Phage
Because lambda has only one insertion site (between gal or bio), only gal or bio can
be incorporated by excisional error.
Because all of the phage genes are still in the cell, phages are still made with the
circular defective phage genome copied and put in each phage head. These are
specialized transducing phage (only able to transduce bio or gal).
Specialized transduction occurs when bacterial genes picked up by error in the
excision process are transferred to another closely related but often genetically
distinct cell. If any genes on the exogenote are stabilized by recombinational
exchange, then new genetic combinations occur.
26
CHAPTER 3 | BACTERIAL GENETICS
gal+
Specialized If cell is recA+, then the
transduction: gal gene may be
λdgal+ infects stabilized by homologous
a gal− recombination
bacterium
gal+ gal−
recA gal− gal+
bio+ bio+
Figure FigureII 3II135. 15.SpecSipaleiczieadlized TraTnrsadnusdctuioctnion
Only those genes next to the phage insertion site can be transduced by specialized
transduction.
Table II 3 1. Transformation, Conjugation, and Transduction
Requirement Transformation Conjugation Transduction
Is cell to cell contact required? No Yes No
Does it require an antecedent phage infection? No No Yes
Is competency required? Yes No No
Is naked (free) DNA involved? Yes No No
Is recombination required to stabilize new genes? Yes No for F+ ́ F Yes
Yes for Hfr ́ F
Table II 3 2. Generalized and Specialized Transduction
Generalized Specialized
Mechanism Error in assembly Error of excision
Requires stable insertion of prophage DNA (lysogeny)
Genes that may be transferred Any Only genes next to insertion sit
Recall Question
The process of transduction requires which of the following?
A. Fertility factor
B. Free DNA
C. Origin of transfer (oriT)
D. Phage vector
Answer: D
261
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
DRUG RESISTANCE
Drug resistance is becoming a significant problem. There are bacteria for which
most antibiotics no longer work, and we are entering a “post antibiotic era.”
There are 3 types of antibiotic resistance: intrinsic, chromosome mediated, and
plasmid mediated. Drug resistance can be transferred from one genus of bacteria
to another, e.g., from normal flora to a pathogen.
Intrinsic Drug Resistance
Bacteria are intrinsically resistant to an antibiotic if they lack the target molecule
for the drug or if their normal anatomy and physiology make them refractory to
the drug’s action.
• Bacteria that lack mycolic acids are intrinsically resistant to isoniazid.
• Bacteria such as Mycoplasma that lack peptidoglycan are intrinsically
resistant to penicillin.
Chromosome Mediated Resistance
In chromosome mediated resistance, resistance is conveyed by genes located on
the bacterial chromosome.
• Most commonly, these genes modify the receptor for a drug so the drug
can no longer bind (e.g., a mutation in a gene for a penicillin binding
protein).
• In general, drug resistance is low level.
• In methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus, a major penicillin binding
protein was mutated.
• Even low level resistance may be clinically significant, e.g., in Streptococcus
pneumoniae meningitis.
Plasmid Mediated Resistance
The genes that determine this resistance are located on plasmids.
• Plasmid mediated resistance is created by a variety of mechanisms, but
often genes code for enzymes that modify the drug.
• R factors are conjugative plasmids carrying genes for drug resistance.
– One section of the DNA (containing oriT and the tra gene region) medi
ates conjugation.
– The other section (R determinant) carries genes for drug resistance.
Multiple genes seem to have been inserted through transpositional
insertion into a “hot spot.”
Multiple drug resistance (MDR) plasmids arise from mobile DNA segments
known as transposons (integrons) or gene cassettes. Transposons have the
following features:
• Are mobile genetic elements (DNA) that can move themselves or a copy
from one molecule of DNA to another (“jumping genes”)
• Are found in eukaryotic and bacterial cells and viruses
26
CHAPTER 3 | BACTERIAL GENETICS
• Have at least 1 gene for a transposase (enzyme involved in the movement)
• Create additional mutations with their insertion into another totally
unrelated gene
A typical genetic map of an R factor (conjugative drug resistant plasmid) is shown
below:
R factor = R determinant + RTF
R Determinant Segment
R e sistanc e D e ter
S u Ap
mi
na
t
m K
S m
Tn3
m
C N Key:
Tn4 m
1 Cm = Chloramphenicol
S I
I Genes for Drug S Sm = Streptomycin
1 OriT
Resistance Su = Sulfonamide
Ap = Ampicillin
Km = Kanamycin
Nm = Neomycin
Tn = Transposon
Tra
g ene
region IS = I
S
n
e
s
q
e
u
rt
e
i
n
o
c
n
e
RTF = Resistance
RTF Segment Transfer Factor
RTF Segment = Equivalent of an F Factor
Figure IIFig3ure16.II A3 1R6e.sistanGceenetic MTarpansfoefr an RFFaaccttoorr
Table II 3 3. Plasmid Mediated Mechanisms of Bacterial Drug Resistance
Antimicrobial Agent Mechanism
Penicillins and cephalosporins Production of β lactamase; cleavage of β lactam rings
Aminoglycosides Production of acetyltransferase, adenosyltransferase, or phosphotransferase;
inactivation of drug by acetylation, adenosylation, or phosphorylation
Chloramphenicol Production of acetyltransferase; inactivation of drug by acetylation
Tetracyclines Increased efflux out of cell
Sulfonamides Active export out of cell and lowered affinity of enzyme
Vancomycin Ligase produces cell wall pentapeptides that terminate in D alanine D lactate,
which will not bind to drug
263
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 3 4. Emerging Bacterial Resistances to Antimicrobial Agents
Antimicrobic Mechanism
Inhibitors of Cell Wall Synthesis
Altered Accumulation Altered Target Enzymatic Inactivation
β lactams Variable outer membranes Mutant and new PBPs (chro β lactamases* (plasmid
(chromosome mediated): mosome mediated): Strepto mediated), Staphylococcus
Gram (—), e.g., Pseudomo coccus pneumoniae (penicil aureus (penicillin); Haemophilus
nas aeruginosa lin); Haemophilus influenzae influenzae (ampicillin); Neisseria
(ceftazidime) (ampicillin); Staphylococcus gonorrhoeae (penicillin);
aureus (methicillin); Neisseria Klebsiella and Enterobacter
gonorrhoeae (penicillin) spp. (third generation cephalo
sporins)
Glycopeptides Increased cell wall thick Amino acid substitution —
ness (chromosome (chromosome or plasmid
mediated), vancomycin mediated transposon),
intermediate Staphylococ Enterococcus faecalis and E.
cus aureus (VISA) faecium (vancomycin);
Staphylococcus aureus
(plasmid mediated), vancomy
cin, VRSA†
Isoniazid — — Mutation of catalase peroxidase
gene needed to activate the
drug (chromosome mediated),
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Ethambutol — Mutation of arabinosyl —
transferase gene (chromo
some mediated), Mycobacte
rium tuberculosis
Inhibitors of Protein Synthesis
Aminoglycosides Oxidative transport Ribosomal binding site Adenylases, acetylases, phos
required (plasmid medi mutations (chromosome phorylases (plasmid mediated),
ated), Pseudomonas mediated), Enterococcus, Klebsiella and Enterobacter
aeruginosa, gentamicin gentamicin spp., gentamicin
Macrolides, Minimal outer membrane Methylation of 23S rRNA Phosphotransferase, esterase
lincosamides penetration (chromosome (plasmid mediated), Bacteroi (plasmid mediated), Gram (+)
mediated), Gram (—); des fragilis, Staphylococcus cocci
efflux pump (plasmid aureus, MLS resistance‡
mediated), Gram (+) cocci;
erythromycin
Chloramphenicol — — Acetyltransferase (plasmid
mediated), Salmonella, chloram
phenicol
Tetracycline Efflux pump (transposon in New protein protects ribo —
plasmid), widespread due some site (transposon in
to use in animal feed chromosome or plasmid),
Staphylococcus aureus
(Continued )
26
CHAPTER 3 | BACTERIAL GENETICS
Table II 3 4. Emerging Bacterial Resistances to Antimicrobial Agents (Cont’d)
Antimicrobic Mechanism
Inhibitors of Nucleic Acid Synthesis
Fluoroquino Efflux pump (plasmid Mutant topoisomerase —
lones mediated), Enterococcus; (chromosome mediated),
permeability mutation Escherichia coli and Pseudo
(chromosomal), monas aeruginosa, ciprofloxa
Pseudomonas cin
Rifamycins — Mutant RNA polymerase —
(chromosome mediated),
Mycobacterium tuberculosis,
Staphylococcus spp., and
Neisseria meningitidis,
rifampin
Folate inhibitors — New dihydropteroate synthe —
tase, altered dihydrofolate
reductase (chromosome
mediated), Enterobacteria
ceae sulfonamides
*Gram (+) β lactamases are exoenzymes with little activity against cephalosporins, methicillin, or oxacillin. Gram ( )β lactamases act in the
periplasmic space and may have both penicillinase and cephalosporinase activity. Extended spectrum β lactamases (ESBLs) are inducible and
may not be detected by susceptibility testing. The range of ESBLs includes multiple cephalosporins. TEM 1 is the most common of the plasmid
lactamase genes.
†The most common vancomycin resistance genes, vanA and vanB, are found in a transposon. These have been transferred from Enterococcus to
a multidrug resistance plasmid in Staphylococcus aureus. The super multidrug resistance plasmid now contains resistance genes against
lactams, vancomycin, aminoglycosides, trimethoprim, and some disinfectants.
‡MLS, macrolide lincosamide streptogramin resistance. Methylation of the 23S rRNA will impart resistance to erythromycin, lincomycin, and
clindamycin.
Recall Question
Multiple drug resistance plasmids arise from which of the following?
A. Bound DNA segments
B. Excisional errors
C. Transposons
D. Vectors
Answer: C
26
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
ANTIBIOTIC SUSCEPTIBILITY TESTING
Kirby Bauer Agar Disk Diffusion Test
With this test, a solid medium with the patient’s isolate is swabbed on the entire
plate surface. Multiple paper disks, each with a single dried drug, are placed on the
plate. The hydration and diffusion of the drug set up a concentration gradient
during incubation and growth of the bacteria.
The diameter of the zones of inhibition must be measured to determine significance.
• Advantages: inexpensive, easy, can test numerous antibiotics on one plate,
wealth of information based on clinical correlation
• Disadvantages: qualitative
Bacterial isolate is classified as resistant, intermediate, or susceptible to each drug.
Antibiotic Susceptibility Testing
Kirby Bauer Agar Diffusion Plate
= Paper disk with antibiotic Template
to read
drug A:
r
i
s
Template
to read
drug B:
r
i
Bacterial Growth
s
No Growth (patient's isolate
(growth inhibited) not inhibited)
Figure II 3 17. The Kirby Bauer Agar Disk Diffusion Technique
Figure II 3 17. Kirby Bauer Agar Disk Diffusion Technique
Minimal Inhibitory Concentration
Minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) measures antibiotic inhibition of
bacterial multiplication. This is a dilution technique where each container (well of
microtiter plate, test tube, or automated system bottle) has one concentration of
an antibiotic with the patient’s isolate. One control container always has just the
patient’s isolate and growth medium with no antibiotic, to make sure the inoculum
is viable.
• MIC is lowest concentration showing no visible growth
• Indicates levels needed to inhibit; does not necessarily indicate killing
levels (done with MBC)
26
CHAPTER 3 | BACTERIAL GENETICS
Minimal Bactericidal Concentration
Minimal bactericidal concentration (MBC) measures the antibiotic killing
(bactericidal activity). This is a dilution technique starting with the MIC contain
ers and subplating onto solid medium. Because a small inoculum is used on the
plate with a large volume of medium, this dilutes the drug way below the MIC and
allows determination of viability of cells.
• MBC is lowest antibiotic concentration showing no growth on subcul
ture to media without the antibiotic
• Important for treating immunocompromised patients whose immune
system cannot kill the bacteria while they are inhibited
Minimal Inhibitory Concentration = MIC
1. Each container has one concentration of a drug.
2. Each container has identical inoculum of the patient's bacterial isolate
3. Must run a no drug control.
4. Lowest concentration showing no visible growth = MIC
(in example, MIC = 2 μg/ml)
0 μg/ml
Conc. of 0.25 0.5 1 2 4 8
No drug
drug: μg/ml μg/ml μg/ml μg/ml μg/ml μg/ml
control
Sub culture onto drug free agar to look for survivors when the drug is diluted out.
Minimal Bactericidal Concentration (MBC)
(Not routinely done in many hospitals but ordered when necessary)
The lowest drug concentration showing no growth on sub culture to media without drugs = MBC
MBC in example would be 4 μg/ml.
Figure II 3 19. The Minimal FigureInhibitIoIry3 18. MCIoCncenatnradtionMBC for a D(MruIgC) and
the Minimal Bactericidal Concentration (MBC) for a Drug
26

Medically Relevant Viruses 4#
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Demonstrate understanding of structure, morphology, and replication
of medically important viruses
❏ Answer questions related to patterns of infection, resistance, and
treatment of DNA viruses, positive stranded RNA viruses, negative
stranded RNA viruses, double stranded RNA viruses, onco viruses,
and prions
❏ Explain information related to viral hepatitis
STRUCTURE AND MORPHOLOGY
BRIDGE TO BIOCHEMISTRY
DNA Structural
Naked capsid
or + proteins == Nucleocapsid Positive sense = coding strand
virus
RNA* (capsomers, etc.)
Negative sense = template strand
Enzymes e.g., polymerase
Nucleocapsid + Host membrane with *Positive sense RNA = (+)RNA (can be
viral specified glycoproteins = Enveloped virus used itself as mRNA)
(critical for infectiousness
of viral progeny) *Negative sense RNA = ( )RNA
• Complementary to mRNA
Figure II 4 1. The Basic Virion
Figure II 4 1. Basic Virion
• Cannot be used as mRNA
• Requires virion associated, RNA
dependent RNA polymerase (as part of
the mature virus)
26
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
VIRAL STRUCTURE
Icosahedral Helical
Naked Capsid Viruses
(no naked
Nucleocapsid helical viruses)
Enveloped Capsid Viruses
Lipid
Bilayer
Glycoprotein
Figure IFIigu4re 2. IIM4orp2h.oloMgyorphology ofof VViirruusseess
DNA Viruses Naked DNA Viruses
Poxvirus Herpesvirus Hepadna Adenovirus Polyoma Parvovirus
Papilloma
RNA Viruses Naked RNA Viruses
Flavivirus
Paramyxovirus Rhabdovirus Orthomyxovirus Coronavirus Togavirus Reovirus Calicivirus Picornavirus
Hepevirus
Figure II 4 3. Relative Sizes and Shapes of Different Viruses
Figure II 4 3. Relative Sizes and Shapes of Different Viruses
27
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
VIRAL REPLICATION
Attachment to specific host cell receptors:
this binding determines what cell can be infected (tropism).
Penetration
Host cell
Uncoating (release of nucleic acid)
with specific
chemical Macromolecular synthesis
groups a. Early mRNA and protein synthesis:
(receptors) Proteins to shut off host cell
Proteins to replicate viral genome (if needed)
b. Replication of the genome
c. Late mRNA and protein synthesis: structural proteins
Post translational modification of proteins
Assembly of new virus particles
Release (lysis of the cell or budding out)
Figure II 4 4. Generalized Viral Replication Scheme
Figure II 4 4. Generalized Viral Replication Scheme
The following are drugs that target viral replication:
Number
from Figure Examples of Drugs that Use to
Above Stages of Viral Replication Target Mechanism of Action Treat
1 Attachment Maraviroc CCR5 antagonist HIV
2 Penetration Enfuvirtide Fusion inhibitor HIV
3 Uncoating (no longer used; only Amantadine/ Blocks uncoating via Influenza
had activity against influenza A) rimantadine M2 protein
4 Macromolecular synthesis (just Acyclovir. zidovudine, Nucleic acid synthesis Many
examples; largest list of antivirals) etc.
5 Post translational modification of Ritonavir Protease inhibitor HIV
proteins
6 Assembly N/A N/A N/A
7 Release Oseltamivir Neuraminidase inhibitor Influenza
Retrovirus Integration Raltegravir Integrase inhibitor HI
specific
There are several important steps in viral replication.
271
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Spread
Viruses are spread basically by the same mechanisms (e.g., respiratory droplets
or sexually) as other pathogens. Arthropod borne viruses are referred to as
arboviruses.
Most belong to 3 formal taxonomic groups:
• Togavirus encephalitis viruses (a.k.a. alphaviruses)
• Flavivirus
• Bunyavirus
Mosquitoes are the most common vectors, while ticks, biting midges, and
sandflies are less common vectors.
Attachment
Viruses bind through specific interaction with the host cell surface components
and
• Specific viral surface glycoproteins of enveloped viruses, or
• Specific viral surface proteins of naked viruses.
Naked
virus
Host Cell
proteins
Receptor
on cell
Enveloped
virus Receptor
glycoproteins on host cell
Figure II 4 5. Attachment
Figure II 4 5. Attachment
These interactions (and the distribution of the receptors) determine viral host
range (e.g., horses or humans) and tissue specificity (e.g., liver versus heart;
tropism).
27
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
Table II 4 1. Specific Viral Receptors to Know
Virus Target Cell Receptor on Host Cell
HIV Th cells, macrophages, CD4 plus CCR5 or CXCR4
microglia
EBV B lymphocytes CD21 = CR2
Rabies Neurons Acetylcholine receptor
Rhinovirus Respiratory epithelial cells ICAM 1
Table II 4 2. Naked versus Enveloped Viruses
Naked Enveloped
Inactivated by heat, No Yes, since the lipid envelope holds the
detergents, acid and glycoproteins essential for attachment.
organic solvents like Dissolving the envelope inhibits
ether and alcohols? attachment and therefore uptake.
Entry into Host Cell
Viral entry takes place by receptor mediated endocytosis, uptake via coated pits, or
for those enveloped viruses with fusion proteins via fusion of the cell membrane
with the viral envelope.
Replication of the Genomic Nucleic Acid (NA)
Progeny viruses have a nucleic acid sequence identical to the parent virus. All
single stranded RNA viruses replicate through a replicative intermediate.
Table II 4 3. Strategy for Viral Genome Replication
Intermediate
Virus Type Parental Genome Replicative Form Progeny Genome
Most dsDNA dsDNA dsDNA
viruses
Hepatitis B dsDNA ssRNA → dsDNA
Most +ssRNA +ssRNA -ssRNA +ssRNA
viruses
Retroviruses +ssRNA → dsDNA +ssRNA
+ssRNA
-ssRNA viruses -ssRNA -ssRNA
+ means an RNA which can serve as mRNA (or for the retroviruses has the same sequence.)
→ = RNA dependent DNA polymerase
• Called reverse transcriptase for the retroviruses.
• Called the DNA polymerase for hepatitis B.
• Both actually make the first strand of the DNA using the RNA original and then break down
the RNA and use the single strand of DNA as template to make the second strand.
27
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Release of Viruses
Naked viruses lyse the host cells. Thus, there are no persistent productive
infections with naked viruses (only cytolytic productive or latent infections).
Release of enveloped viruses: Budding leads to cell senescence (aging), but cells
may produce a low level of virus for years as occurs in chronic hepatitis B.
Virus specified
proteins
Host
membrane
Nucleocapsid
Figure II 4 7. Release of Enveloped Virus
Figure II 4 6. Release of Enveloped Virus
The glycoproteins on the enveloped viral surface are essential for viral infectivity.
Recall Question
Oseltamivir prevents which stage of viral infection in influenza?
A. Attachment
B. Assembly
C. Integration
D. Penetration
E. Release
Answer: E
27
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
VIRAL INFECTION
Line = Virus titer; shaded area is disease state.
Acute infection:
Smallpox
Smallpox
Acute infection with
Intact virus not made
rare late complication:
Measles/SSPE
Measles SSPE
Some viral proteins
Latent infection: made to maintain
Varicella Zoster latency
Chickenpox Noninfectious Shingles
Viral shedding
Chronic infection:
Hepatitis B
(persistent productive)
Fatigue
Figure II 4 8. Time Courses of Viral Infections
Figure II 4 7. Time Courses of Viral Infections
27
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Adolescents
Older
In Utero At Birth Infants Children and Adults
Adults
Young Adults
Cytomegalovirus
Rubella Rubella
HSV 2 HSV 2
HIVHIV
B19 virus B19
Hepatitis B Hepatitis B
HSV 1
Respiratory
Syncytial
(bronchiolitis)
Parainfluenza
(croup)
(colds)
Rotavirus
(infant
diarrhea)
Influenza
Measles
Mumps
Hepatitis A
Epidemic Gastroenteritis
(Norwalk virus)
⯑oster
Varicella
St. Louis
(chickenpox)
Encephalitis,
WNV
(West Nile
Virus)
Figure II 4 9. The Most Common Age Groups for Viral Infections
Figure II 4 8. Most Common Age Groups for Viral Infection
27
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
VIRAL HEPATITIS
Symptoms of hepatitis include fever, malaise, headache, anorexia, vomiting, dark
urine, and jaundice.
Table II 4 4. Hepatitis Viruses (Hepatotropic)
Hepatitis A Hepatitis B Hepatitis C Hepatitis D Hepatitis E
“Infectious” “Serum” (HBV) “Post transfu “Delta” (HDV) “Enteric” (HEV)
(HAV) sion Non A, Non
B” (HCV)
Family Picornavirus Hepadnavirus Flavivirus N/A Hepevirus
Features • RNA • DNA • RNA • Viroid • RNA
• Naked capsid • Enveloped • Enveloped • Circular RNA • Naked capsid
• Enveloped
Transmission Fecal oral Parenteral, Parenteral, Parenteral, Fecal oral
sexual sexual sexual
Disease • Mild acute • Acute; • Acute is • Co infection • Normal
presentation occasionally usually with HBV: patients mild
• No chronic
severe subclinical occasionally
• Pregnant
• No sequelae
severe
• Chronic: • 80% become patients
5–10% adults chronic • Superinfec severe
90% infants tion with HBV:
• Primary • Chronic in IC
often severe
• Primary hepatocellular patients
hepatocellular carcinoma, • Cirrhosis,
carcinoma, cirrhosis fulminant
cirrhosis hepatitis
Mortality <0.5% 1–2% 0.5–1% High to very high • Normal
patients 1–2%
• Third trimester
pregnant
patients 25%
Diagnosis IgM to HAV HBsAg, IgM to Antibody to HCV, Hepatitis D Ab, Antibody to HEV,
HBcAg ELISA HBsAg ELISA
Treatment Symptomatic IFN α+RTI • Elbasvir/ N/A Mostly symptom
grazoprevir* atic**
(NT analogs)
• Ledipasvir/
sofosbuvir
*ribavirin, ±pegylated IFN α for patients with cirrhosis
**ribavirin and pegylated IFN α can be used for chronic
Note: Hepatitis also may occur in other viral diseases (e.g., CMV and EBV infections, congenital rubella, yellow fever).
27
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Virion diameter
42 nm
Figure II 4 9. Dane Particle
27
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
HBV
Partial
Double Stranded
Penetration and release
Core DNA Genome
of the viral core
DS DNA
Translation
Transcription
Reverse
Transcription
Nucleus
RNA
( + ) DNA Core
( - ) DNA
( - ) DNA
Cytoplasm
HBV
Figure II 4 10. Hepatitis BVirus Replication
27
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 4 5. Hepatitis B Terminology and Markers
Abbreviation Name and Description
HBV Hepatitis B virus, a hepadnavirus (enveloped, partially
double stranded DNA virus); Dane particle = infectious
HBV
HBsAg Antigen found on surface of HBV; also found on
spheres and filaments in patient’s blood: positive
during acute disease; continued presence indicates
carrier state
HBsAb Antibody to HBsAg; provides immunity to hepatitis B
HBcAg Antigen associated with core of HBV
HBcAb Antibody to HBcAg; positive during window phase; IgM
HBcAb is an indicator of recent disease
HBeAg A second, different antigenic determinant on the HBV
core; important indicator of transmissibility
HBeAb Antibody to e antigen; indicates low transmissibility
Delta agent Small RNA virus with HBsAg envelope; defective virus
that replicates only in HBV infected cells
Window period Period between end of detection of HBsAg and begin
ning of detection HBsAb
Table II 4 6. Hepatitis B Serology
HBsAg
HBeAg*
HBV H-HBBccAAbb
DNA IgM IgG HBeAb HBsAb
Acute infection + + - - -
Window period - +/ + + -
Prior infection - + + +
Immunization - - - - +
Chronic infection + + +/ -
*HBeAg: correlates with viral proliferation and infectivity
28
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
Acute Hepatitis B Jaundice
Symptoms
HBs*
window Anti HBs
Anti HBc
HBsAg
HBeAg
Virus
Anti HBe
shedding
Liver enzymes
12345 61224
Months After Exposure
*The window is the time between the disappearance of the HBsAg and before
HBsAb is detected.
Chronic Hepatitis B
Fatigue
Anti HBc
HBsAg
Anti HBe
HBeAg
Virus
shedding
Liver enzymes
1234 56 123456789
Months Years
Time After Exposure
Figure II 4 11. Hepatitis B
Figure II 4 11. Hepatitis B
281
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Recall Question
Which of the following is a DNA virus?
A. Hepatitis A
B. Hepatitis B
C. Hepatitis C
D. Hepatitis D
E. Hepatitis E
Answer: B
DNA VIRUSES: CHARACTERISTICS
All DNA viruses are double stranded (except parvovirus); are icosahedral
(except poxvirus which is a brick shaped “complex”); and replicate their DNA in
the nucleus (except poxvirus).
Table II 4 7. DNA Viruses*
Virion Associated
Virus Family DNA type Polymerase Envelope DNA Replicates in: Major Viruses
Parvovirus ssDNA No Naked Nucleus B19
Papillomavirus dsDNA, circular No Naked Nucleus Papilloma,
Polyoma
Polyomavirus
Adenovirus dsDNA, No Naked Nucleus Adenoviruses
linear
Hepadnavirus Partially dsDNA, Yes*** Enveloped Nucleus, RNA Hepatitis B
circular intermediate
Herpes virus dsDNA, No Enveloped Nucleus; virus HSV,
(nuclear) assembled in Varicella zoster,
linear
nucleus Epstein Barr,
Cytomegalovirus
Poxvirus dsDNA, Yes** Enveloped Cytoplasm Variola, Vaccinia,
Molluscum
linear
contagiosum
*Mnemonic: Pardon Papa As He Has Pox
**Poxviruses have a virion associated transcriptase (DNA dependent RNA polymerase), so they can transcribe their own DNA in the
cytoplasm and make all of the enzymes and factors necessary for replication of the poxvirus DNA in the cytoplasm.
***Hepadnaviruses: DNA viruses that carry a DNA polymerase with reverse transcriptase activity to synthesize an RNA intermediate that is
then used to make the genomic DNA. Hepatitis B is partially double stranded with one complete strand.
28
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
Virion binds
Attachment and
Penetration by
DNA Fusion
Immediate Early
Nucleus (latent)
DNA Protein synthesis
genome
Protein
mRNA
Early (Active
Replication)
Protein synthesis
DNA and genome
replication
mRNA
Late
Protein synthesis
(structural proteins)
Assembly
and Release
by Exocytosis
Syncytia Formation
Figure II 4 12. DNA Virus: Life Cycle of Herpes
Figure II 4 12. DNA Virus: Life Cycle of Herpes
PARVOVIRIDAE
Virus Characteristics
• ssDNA virus, linear
• Naked, icosahedral
28
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Viruses of Medical Importance: B19
Parvovirus
Figure II 4 14. Papillomavirus
B19
Reservoir: human respiratory tract
Transmission: respiratory route, fomites, vertical transmission
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Pathogenesis: B19 infects immature (cycling) erythroid progenitor cells, causing
B19
cell lysis; the resulting anemia is only clinically significant in patients with
• School aged child with fever and sickle cell anemia, and may result in aplastic crisis
indurated facial rash
• Pregnant woman with flu like Diseases
symptoms → hydrops fetalis or
• Children/adults
spontaneous abortion
– Fifth disease, erythema infectiosum, slapped cheek fever: 7−10 day
incubation; nonspecific “flu like” symptoms followed by raised,
indurated facial rash; rash and arthralgias (mostly adults) are due to
immune complexes in skin and joints
– Myocarditis
• Fetus
– Severe anemia
– Congestive heart failure
– Hydrops fetalis
– Spontaneous abortion
Diagnosis: serology and molecular analysis
Treatment: supportive care
PAPILLOMAVIRIDAE
Virus Characteristics
• dsDNA virus, circular
• Naked, icosahedral
Viruses of Medical Importance
• Human papilloma virus (HPV)
Figure II 4Papi1l4lo.mavirPuaspillomavirus Human Papilloma Virus (HPV)
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Distinguishing Characteristics
HPV
• Over 100 serotypes
• Warts
• Different serotypes are associated with different clinical presentations
• Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia Reservoir: human skin and genitals
• Biopsy or Pap smear (koilocytic cells) Transmission: direct contact, fomite
284
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
Pathogenesis
• Virus infects basal layer of the skin and mucous membranes
• Hyperkeratosis leads to the formation of the “wart”
• Malignancy may result: E6 and E7 inhibit tumor suppressor genes p53 and
Rb, respectively
Diseases
• Cutaneous warts
– Common warts (serotypes 2 and 4) are often found on hands and
fingers
– Plantar warts (serotype 1) are often found on soles of feet; usually
deeper and more painful
• Anogenital warts (Condylomata acuminata)
– Over 90% are serotypes 6 and 11 (benign)
– Also cause laryngeal papillomas in infants and sexually active adults
– Serotypes 16 and 18 are preneoplastic (cervical intraepithelial neoplasia
or CIN), 31, 33, 35, 45, 52, 58 (16 and 18 >70% of cases)
• Malignancy
– Viral genes E6 and E7 inactivate tumor suppressor genes
– 95% of CIN cases contain HPV DNA
– Also cause anal, vaginal, vulvar, penile, and laryngeal cancer
Diagnosis
• Cutaneous: clinical grounds
• Genital: finding of koilocytic cells (cells with perinuclear cytoplasmic
vacuolization and nuclear enlargement) in Pap smear
• In situ DNA probes and PCR can be used to confirm any diagnosis and type
the HPV strain involved
Treatment
• Antiviral: cidofovir
• Surgical: cryotherapy, laser therapy, excisional
• Chemical: podophyllin, trichloroacetic acid, 5 fluorouracil
• Immune mediated: imiquimod, interferon alpha
• Recurrence rates 30–70% within 6 months
Prevention: safe sex; vaccines composed of HPV capsid proteins produced by
recombinant DNA technology: GardasilTM quadrivalent (6, 11, 16, 18), GardasilTM 9
(6, 11, 16, 18, 31, 33, 45, 52, 58), CervarixTM (16, 18)
28
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
POLYOMAVIRIDAE
Table II 4 8. Summary of Polyomaviridae
Reservoir/
Virus Transmission Pathogenesis Disease Diagnosis Treatment
BK Respiratory Latent infection Renal disease in AIDS ELISA, PCR Supportive
in kidney patients
JC Respiratory Infection in Progressive multifocal ELISA, PCR Supportive
oligodendrocytes leukoencephalopathy
= demyelination (PML) in AIDS and
transplant patients
ADENOVIRIDAE
Virus Characteristics
• dsDNA, nonenveloped
• Hexons, pentons, and fibers
Viruses of Medical Importance
• Adenovirus
• Over 50 serotypes
• Subgroups A–F
Adenovirus
Reservoir: ubiquitous in humans and animals
Transmission: respiratory, fecal oral, direct contact
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES Pathogenesis
Adenovirus • Penton fibers act as hemagglutinin
• Purified penton fibers are toxic to cells
• Young adults: ARD
• Lytic, latent, or transforming: virus is lytic in permissive cells and can be
• Swimmers and shipyard workers:
chronic or oncogenic in nonpermissive hosts; the adenoviruses are standard
nonpurulent conjunctivitis
example of permissive host (where virus is produced) and nonpermissive
host (where virus is not produced but transformed)
• Daycare: viral gastroenteritis
28
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
Disease
• Acute respiratory disease (ARD) and pneumonia: spring and winter peak
incidence; children, young military recruits, college students serotypes 4 and
7; cough, conjunctivitis, fever, pharyngitis, hoarseness
• Pharyngoconjunctivitis: swimming pool conjunctivitis, pink eye; fever,
sore throat, coryza, red eyes; nonpurulent
• Acute hemorrhagic cystitis: mostly boys age 5–15; dysuria, hematuria
• Gastroenteritis: daycare (not as common as rotavirus); serotypes 40 and 41
• Myocarditis
• Transplant patients
Diagnosis: serology; ELISA
Treatment: supportive care for otherwise healthy patients; cidofovir and alpha
globulins for immunocompromised or severely diseased
Prevention: live, nonattenuated vaccine
Penton fiber
Hexon
Core
DNA
Figure II 4 13. Adenovirus
28
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Recall Question
Which of the following viruses causes fifth disease?
A. Adenovirus
B. Hepatitis A
C. Human papilloma virus
D. Parvovirus B19
E. Varicella zoster virus
Answer: D
HEPADNAVIRIDAE (see previous discussion)
HERPESVIRIDAE
Virus Characteristics
• Large dsDNA
• Enveloped, icosahedral
• Derives envelope from nuclear membrane
• Intranuclear inclusion bodies
• Establishes latency
Figure II 4 15. Herpesvirus
Herpesvirus Viruses of Medical Importance
• Herpes simplex virus 1 and 2 (HSV)
• Varicella zoster virus (VZV)
• Epstein Barr virus (EBV)
• Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
• Human herpesvirus 6 (HHV 6)
• Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV 8)
28
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
HSV 1 and HSV 2 KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Reservoir: human mucosa and ganglia HSV 1 and HSV 2
Transmission: close personal contact (i.e., kissing, sexual contact) • Cold sores/genital vesicles
Pathogenesis: HSV establishes infection in the mucosal epithelial cells and leads • Keratoconjunctivitis
to formation of vesicles; virus travels up the ganglion to establish lifelong latent
• Meningoencephalitis/encephalitis
infection; stress triggers reactivation of virus in nerve and recurrence of vesicles
• Neonatal disseminated/encephalitis
Diseases: HSV 1 infections often occur above the waist, while HSV 2 infections
tend to occur below the waist. • Tzanck smear, Cowdry type Ainclusion
bodies
HSV 1
• Gingivostomatitis and cold sores: blister like lesions on oral mucosa; latent
in trigeminal ganglion
• Keratoconjunctivitis: generally with lid swelling and vesicles; possible
dendritic ulcers; if untreated and repeat attacks, possible blindness
• Encephalitis: fever, headache, confusion; focal temporal lesions and peri
vascular cuffing; if untreated, 70% mortality rate; most common cause of
viral encephalitis in U.S.
HSV 2
• Genital infections: painful genital vesicles; systemic effects include fever,
malaise, myalgia; latency in sacral nerve ganglia
• Neonatal herpes: infection occurs during passage through infected birth
canal; usually severe, i.e., disseminated with liver involvement and high
mortality; encephalitis, high mortality; skin, eyes, mouth)
Diagnosis
• Oral lesions: clinical
• Encephalitis: PCR on CSF; large numbers of RBCs in CSF
• Genital infections: Tzanck smear to show formation of multinucleated giant
cells and Cowdry type A intranuclear inclusions has been largely replaced by
immunofluorescent staining, which can distinguish HSV 1 from HSV 2
Treatment: acyclovir, a nucleoside analog that is only activated in cells infected
with HSV 1, HSV 2, or VZV (because the virus thymidine kinase is required to
activate the drug by placing the first phosphate on the drug, followed by the
phosphorylation via cellular enzymes); if there is acyclovir resistance (caused by a
mutation in the thymidine kinase), use famciclovir, valacyclovir, or penciclovir
28
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES Varicella Zoster Virus (VZV)
VZV Reservoir: human mucosa and nerves
• Chickenpox: unvaccinated child with Transmission: respiratory droplets
asynchronous rash
Pathogenesis: VZV enters the respiratory tract → replicates in local lymph nodes
• Shingles: elderly with unilateral → primary viremia → spleen and liver → secondary viremia → skin (rash)
vesicular rash that follows dermatome → latent in the dorsal root ganglia. Reactivation of virus due to stress or immu
nocompromise causes vesicular lesions and severe nerve pain.
• Tzanck smear with Cowdry type A
intranuclear inclusions and syncytia
Diseases
• Chickenpox
– Fever, pharyngitis, malaise, rhinitis
– Asynchronous rash
– One of 5 “classic” childhood exanthems; less common due to vaccina
tion
• Shingles
– Zoster
– Pain and vesicles restricted to one dermatome
– Fifth or sixth decade of life
– Reactivation of latent infection
Diagnosis: Tzanck smear (Cowdry type A, intranuclear inclusions); antigen
detection by PCR
Treatment: acyclovir (oral for healthy adults and IV for immunocompromised);
aspirin contraindicated due to shingles association with Reye syndrome
Prevention
• Live, attenuated vaccine, booster for patients age 60+ to prevent shingles
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
• VZIG (varicella zoster immunoglobulin) for postexposure prophylaxis of
EBV
the immunocompromised
• Young adult with fever, • Live, attenuated vaccine for varicella
lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly
• Recombinant zoster vaccine
• Downey type II atypical T lymphocytes
reach 70% in blood
Epstein Barr Virus (EBV)
• Heterophile (monospot) positive Reservoir: humans
Transmission: saliva, 90% of adult population is seropositive
29
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
Pathogenesis
• Virus infects nasopharyngeal epithelial cells, salivary and lymphoid tissues
→ latent infection of B cells (EBV binds to CD21 and acts as a B cell
mitogen) → results in production of atypical reactive T cells (Downey cells),
which may constitute up to 70% of WBC count
• Heterophile antibodies are produced (due to B cell mitogenesis)
Diseases
• Heterophile positive mononucleosis, “kissing disease”: fatigue, fever, sore
throat, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly; latency in B cells
• Lymphoproliferative disease: occurs in immunocompromised patients; T
cells can’t control B cell growth
• Hairy oral leukoplakia: hyperproliferation of lingual epithelial cells; occurs
in AIDS patients
Malignancies
• Burkitt lymphoma: cancer of the maxilla, mandible, abdomen; Africa; ma
laria cofactor; AIDS patients; translocation juxtaposes c myc oncogene to a
very active promoter such as immunoglobulin gene promoter
• Nasopharyngeal carcinoma: Asia (most common cancer in southern
China); tumor cells of epithelial origin
• Hodgkin and non Hodgkin lymphoma
Diagnosis: heterophile antibody positive (IgM antibodies that recognize Paul
Bunnell antigen on sheep and bovine RBCs)
Treatment: symptomatic, for uncomplicated mononucleosis
Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Reservoir: humans
CMV
Transmission: saliva, sexual, parenteral, in utero
• Heterophile negative mononucleosis in
Pathogenesis: CMV infects salivary gland epithelial cells and establishes a
children and adults
persistent infection in fibroblasts, epithelial cells, and macrophages; latency in
mononuclear cells • Neonate with jaundice,
hepatosplenomegaly, thrombocytic
Disease
purpura
• Cytomegalic inclusion disease: most common in utero infection in U.S.;
• Owl eye intranuclear inclusion bodies
ranges from infected with no obvious defects to severe disease characterized
in biopsy
by jaundice, hepatosplenomegaly, thrombocytic purpura (“blueberry muffin
baby”), pneumonitis, and CNS damage to death
• Mononucleosis (children and adults): heterophile negative mononucleosis
• Immunocompromised patients
29
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
• Interstitial pneumonitis to severe systemic infection (due to reactivation in
transplanted organ or AIDS patient)
• CMV retinitis common in AIDS patients
• GI disease common in AIDS patients
Diagnosis
• Owl eye inclusion (“sight o megalo virus”) in biopsy material and urine
• Basophilic intranuclear inclusions
• Serology, DNA detection, virus culture
Treatment: supportive for healthy patients; ganciclovir/foscarnet ± human
immunoglobulin for immunocompromised (AIDS and transplant patients)
(resistance to ganciclovir through UL97 gene)
Prevention: safe sex; screening of blood and organ donors
HHV 6/7
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES Reservoir: humans
HHV 6 Transmission: respiratory droplets
Infant with fever → lacy body rash Pathogenesis: replicates in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
Disease: roseola (exanthem subitum); fever for 3−5 days followed by lacy body
rash
Diagnosis: clinical
Treatment: symptomatic
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES HHV 8 (Kaposi sarcoma associated herpesvirus KSHV)
HHV 8 Reservoir: humans
AIDS patient with sarcoma Transmission: sexual contact, saliva, vertical, transplantation
Pathogenesis: gene turns on vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF); plays
direct role in development of Kaposi sarcoma; latent in B cells and glandular
epithelial cells
Disease: Kaposi sarcoma
Diagnosis: clinical; serology, PCR
Treatment: none
29
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
Table II 4 9. Herpesvirus Infections
Site of Primary Clinical Presentation of Primary Clinical Presentation of
Virus Infection Infection Site of Latency Recurrent Infection
HSV 1 Mucosa Gingivostomatitis, keratocon Trigeminal ganglia Cold sores
junctivitis, pharyngitis
HSV 2 Mucosa Genital herpes, neonatal Sacral ganglia Genital herpes
herpes
VZV Mucosa Chickenpox Dorsal root ganglia Shingles (zoster)
EBV Mucosal Mononucleosis (heterophile ⊕) B cells Asymptomatic
epithelial cells, shedding of virus
B cells
CMV Mononuclear Mononucleosis (heterophile -), Mononuclear cells Asymptomatic
cells, epithelial cytomegalic inclusion disease shedding of virus
cells
HHV 6 Mononuclear Roseola infantum Mononuclear cells Asymptomatic
cells shedding of virus
HHV 8 Dermis Fever, rash B cells, glandular Kaposi sarcoma
epithelial cells
POXVIRIDAE
Virus Characteristics
• Large dsDNA, enveloped
• Complex morphology
• Replicates in the cytoplasm
• Potential biowarfare agent
Viruses of Medical Importance Figure II 4 16. Poxvirus
Poxvirus
• Variola
• Vaccinia (vaccine strain)
NOTE
• Molluscum contagiosum
In 2022, there was a global outbreak of
• Orf
monkeypox virus.
• Monkeypox
• Highest incidence in United States
• At greatest risk is men who have sex
with men
• Transmitted by respiratory or direct
contact
• Symptoms include fever,
lymphadenopathy, vesicular rash that
crusts over
29
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES Variola/Smallpox
Variola/Smallpox Reservoir: humans; Variola has 1 serotype making eradication (1979) possible
• Virus extinct Transmission: respiratory route
• Synchronous rash begins in mouth → Pathogenesis: virus enters the upper respiratory tract via inhalation and dissemi
face and body nates via lymphatics, leading to viremia; after a secondary viremia, virus infects all
dermal tissues and internal organs, forming classic “pocks”
• Guarnieri bodies (intracytoplasmic
inclusions)
Disease
• 5−17 day incubation
• Prodrome of flu like illness for 2–4 days, followed by rash that begins in
mouth and spreads to face, arms, legs, hands, feet (can cover entire body
within 24 hours)
• All vesicles are in same stage of development (synchronous rash)
Diagnosis: clinical; Guarnieri bodies found in infected cells (intracytoplasmic)
Treatment: supportive care
Prevention: live, attenuated vaccine
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES Molluscum contagiosum
Molluscum Contagiosum Reservoir: humans
• Young adult (wrestling, swim team) Transmission: direct contact (sexual) and fomites
• Umbilicated warts
Pathogenesis: replication in dermis
• Eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusion
Disease: single or multiple (<20) benign, wart like tumors; molluscum bodies in
bodies central caseous material (eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusion bodies)
Diagnosis: clinical (warts are umbilicated); eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusion
bodies
Treatment: self limiting in healthy persons; ritonavir, cidofovir for
immunocompromised
29
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
Recall Question
HSV 1 virus lies latent in which of the following nerve ganglion?
A. Facial nerve ganglion
B. Lingual nerve ganglion
C. Oculomotor nerve ganglion
D. Trigeminal nerve ganglion
Answer: D
RNA VIRUSES: CHARACTERISTICS
All RNA viruses are single stranded (ss) except Reovirus; ss( )RNA viruses carry
RNA dependent RNA polymerase. A virion associated polymerase is also carried
by Reovirus, Arenavirus, and Retrovirus (reverse transcriptase).
Most RNA are enveloped; the only naked ones are Picornavirus, Calicivirus and
Hepevirus, and Reovirus.
Some RNA viruses are segmented, i.e., there are different genes on different pieces
of RNA:
• Reovirus
• Orthomyxovirus
• Bunyavirus
• Arenavirus
29
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
POSITIVE STRANDED RNA VIRUSES
Table II 4 10. Positive Stranded RNA Viruses*
RNA Virion Associated
Virus Family Structure Polymerase Envelope Shape Multiplies in Major Viruses
Calicivirus ss(+)RNA No polymerase Naked Icosahedral Cytoplasm Norwalk agent
Linear Noro like virus
Hepevirus ss(+)RNA No polymerase Naked Icosahedral Cytoplasm Hepatitis E
Linear
Picornavirus ss(+)RNA No polymerase Naked Icosahedral Cytoplasm Polio**
Linear ECHO
Enteroviruses
Rhino
Coxsackie
Hepatitis A
Flavivirus ss(+)RNA No polymerase Enveloped Icosahedral Cytoplasm Yellow fever
Linear Dengue
St. Louis
encephalitis
Hepatitis C
West Nile virus
Togavirus ss(+)RNA No polymerase Enveloped Icosahedral Cytoplasm Rubella
Linear WEE, EEE
Venezuelan
encephalitis
Coronavirus ss(+)RNA No polymerase Enveloped Helical Cytoplasm Coronaviruses
Linear SARS CoV
Retrovirus Diploid ss RNA dep. Enveloped Icosahedral Nucleus HIV
(+) RNA
or truncated
DNA HTLV
Linear conical
polymerase Sarcoma
*Mnemonic: (+)RNA Viruses: Call Henry Pico and Flo To Come Rightaway
**Mnemonic: Picornaviruses: PEE Co Rn A Viruses Polio, Entero, Echo, Coxsackie, Rhino, Hep A
29
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
Fusion with
lysosome
Translation
ss(+)RNA 3' A+AA
ss(+)RNA ss(−)RNAs ss(+)RNA
Polyprotein
RNA dependent
Packaged
RNA polymerase
and
Released by lysis
Figure II 4 17. Positive Sense RNA Virus Life Cycle
Figure II 4 14. Positive Sense RNA Virus Life Cycle
CALICIVIRIDAE
Family Characteristics
• Naked, icosahedral
• Positive sense ssRNA
Viruses of Medical Importance
• Norwalk virus (Norovirus)
• Noro like virus
29
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES Norwalk Virus
Norwalk Virus Reservoir: human GI tract
• School aged child → adult Transmission: fecal oral route, contaminated food and water
• Acute viral gastroenteritis Disease: acute gastroenteritis
(noninflammatory)
• Watery; no blood or pus in stools
• Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea
• 60% of all nonbacterial gastroenteritis in U.S.
• Outbreak of viral gastroenteritis in cruise ships attributed to Norovirus
Diagnosis: RIA, ELISA
Treatment: self limiting; no specific antiviral treatment
Prevention: handwashing
HEPEVIRIDAE
• Naked, icosahedral
• Positive sense ssRNA
Hepatitis E Virus (previously discussed)
PICORNAVIRIDAE
Family Characteristics
• Small, naked, icosahedral
• Positive sense ssRNA
• Summer/fall peak incidence
• Resistant to alcohol, detergents (naked capsid)
• Divided into genera:
– Enteroviruses: fecal oral transmission, do not cause diarrhea, peak age
<9 years, stable at pH 3
– Rhinoviruses: not stable under acidic conditions, growth at 33 C (91.4
F)
– Heparnavirus
Viruses of Medical Importance
• Enteroviruses (acid stable): polio virus; coxsackie virus A; coxsackie virus B;
Figure II 4Pico1r8n.avirusPicornavirus
D68; echoviruses
• Rhinoviruses (acid labile)
• Heparnaviruses: HAV
29
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
Table II 4 11. Summary of Picornaviridae
Treatment*/
Virus Transmission Pathogenesis Diseases Diagnosis Prevention
Enteroviruses
Polio Fecal oral Virus targets Asymptomatic to Serology (virus No specific
anterior horn motor fever of unknown absent from CSF) antiviral/live
neurons origin; aseptic vaccine (Sabin);
meningitis; paralytic killed vaccine
polio (flaccid asym (Salk)
metric paralysis, no
sensory loss)
Neural fatigue Post Polio Syndrome Patient with polio
decades earlier,
progressive
muscle atrophy
Coxsackie A Fecal oral Fecal oral spread Hand, foot, and Virus isolation No specific
with potential for mouth (A16); from throat, treatment/
dissemination to herpangina; aseptic stool, or CSF handwashing
other organs; often meningitis; acute
asymptomatic with lymphoglandular
viral shedding pharyngitis; common
cold
Coxsackie B Fecal oral As above Bornholm disease As above No specific/
(devil’s grip); aseptic handwashing
meningitis; severe
systemic disease of
newborns;
myocarditis
D68 Fecal oral, Invade mucosa, Motor neuron Serology/RT PCR No specific/IVIG/
respiratory lymphatics; poten disease; respiratory handwashing
tial spread to CNS diseases
Echoviruses Fecal oral As above Fever and rash of As above No specific/
unknown origin; handwashing
aseptic meningitis
Rhinovirus
Rhinovirus Respiratory Acid labile; grows Common cold; #1 Clinical No specific/
at 33 C (91.4 F); cause, peak sum handwashing
over 100 serotypes mer/fall
Heparnavirus
HAV Fecal oral Virus targets Infectious hepatitis IgM to HAV No specific/
hepatocytes; serology killed vaccine
liver function is and hyperim
impaired mune serum
*Pleconaril (blocks uncoating by fitting into cleft in receptor binding canyon of picornavirus capsid) is available on a limited basis. Must be
administered early.
29
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Recall Question
Molluscum contagiosum demonstrates which of the following
findings on microscopy?
A. Cowdry type A, intranuclear inclusions
B. Eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusion bodies
C. Owl’s eye inclusions
D. Koilocytes
E. Negri bodies
Answer: B
FLAVIVIRIDAE
Family Characteristics
• Enveloped, icosahedral
• Positive sense ssRNA
• Arthropod borne (arboviruses)
Viruses of Medical Importance
• Arthropod borne viruses (arboviruses)St. Louis encephalitis virus (SLE)
• West Nile encephalitis virus (WNV)
• Dengue virus
• Yellow fever virus (YFV)
• Zika
• Hepatitis C virus (HCV; discussed with the hepatitis viruses)
30
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
Table II 4 12. Summary of Flaviviridae
Virus Transmission Host(s) Disease Diagnosis Prevention
St. Louis Mosquito Birds Encephalitis Serology, Symptomatic/
encephalitis (Culex) hemagglutina vector control
virus tion inhibition,
ELISA, latex
particle aggluti
nation
West Nile Mosquito Birds (killed by Encephalitis As above Symptomatic/
encephalitis (Culex) virus) vector control
virus
Dengue Mosquito Humans Break bone fever (rash, As above Symptomatic/
(Aedes) (monkeys) muscle and joint pain), vector control
reinfection, can result
in dengue hemorrhagic
shock
Yellow Mosquito Humans Yellow fever: liver, As above Symptomatic/
Fever virus (Aedes) (monkeys) kidney, heart, and GI vector control/
(black vomit) damage live, attenuated
vaccine
Zika Mosquito Vertebrates Mild → febrile illness RT PCR serology Symptomatic/
(Aedes), of rash and arthralgia vector control
vertical, sexual Congenital: microen
cephaly and fetal
demise
TOGAVIRIDAE
Family Characteristics
• Enveloped, icosahedral
• Positive sense ssRNA
Viruses of Medical Importance
• Alphaviruses (arboviruses)
– Eastern equine encephalitis virus (EEE)
– Western equine encephalitis virus (WEE)
Figure II 4 19. Togavirus
Togavirus
– Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEE)
– Chikungunya
• Rubivirus
– Rubella
30
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 4 13. Summary of Togaviridae
Virus Transmission Host Disease(s) Diagnosis Prevention
Eastern equine Mosquito Birds, horses Encephalitis Cytopathology, Killed vaccines
encephalitis immunofluorescence, for EEE and
virus (EEE), RT PCR, WEE
Venezuelan serology
equine enceph
alitis virus
(VEE), Western
equine enceph
alitis virus
(WEE)
Chikungunya Mosquito Primates, Febrile, Cytopathology, Killed vaccines
(Aedes) rodents, polyarthralgia, immunofluorescence, for EEE and
birds arthritis RT PCR, serology WEE
Rubella Respiratory humans German measles Serology Live,
(erythematous rash attenuated
begins on face, vaccine
progresses to torso)
Vertical humans Congenital rubella
syndrome*
*Congenital rubella syndrome: patent ductus arteriosus, pulmonary stenosis, cataracts, microcephaly, deafness (effects are more serious if
maternal infection is acquired during first 16 weeks’ gestation)
CORONAVIRIDAE
Family Characteristics
• Enveloped, helical
• Positive sense ssRNA
• Hemagglutinin molecules make up peplomers on virus surface, which give
shape like sun with corona
• Cell receptor is ACE2
Viruses of Medical Importance
• Coronavirus
• Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS CoV)
• Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS CoV 2)
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES Coronavirus
SARS CoV • Second most common cause of the common cold
• Winter/spring peak incidence
• Patient with acute respiratory distress
• Travel to Far East or Toronto
SARS CoV
• Winter/spring peak incidence
Reservoir: birds and small mammals (civet cats
302
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
Transmission: respiratory droplets; virus also found in urine, sweat, and feces;
original case is thought to have jumped from animal to human
Disease: severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)
• Atypical pneumonia
• Clinical case definition includes fever of >38.0 C (100.4 F), flu like illness,
dry cough, dyspnea, and progressive hypoxia
• Chest x ray may show patchy distribution of focal interstitial infiltrates
Diagnosis
• Includes clinical presentation and prior history of travel to endemic area or
an association with someone who recently traveled to endemic area
• Lab tests: detection of antibodies to SARS CoV, RT PCR, and isolation of
the virus in culture
Treatment: supportive; ribavirin and interferon are promising
SARS CoV 2
COVID 19, the new coronavirus seen throughout the world in 2020, is suspected
to have originated in Wuhan, China. Different variants (England, South Africa)
have varying degrees of transmissibility and severity.
Reservoir: bats (suspected)
Transmission: respiratory droplets within 6 feet; original case is thought to have
jumped from animal to human
Epidemiology: highly contagious
• More severe in elderly and immunocompromised patients
• Can be spread by asymptomatic carriers
Disease: coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID 19)
• Incubation time 4–14 days
• Generalized symptoms: fever/chills, muscle aches/fatigue, headache
• Respiratory symptoms: fever, sore throat, cough, congestion/coryza, loss of
smell and/or taste, shortness of breath, bilateral infiltrates on chest
imaging (might require ventilator)
• GI symptoms: nausea/vomiting , diarrhea, severe acute respiratory syn
drome in severe disease
Diagnosis: clinical suspicion (including risk of possible exposure); serology to
detect antibodies to SARS CoV; RT PCR for viral RNA from nasal swab; nucleic
acid amplification test (NAAT) to detect viral genetic material; antigen test for
viral proteins (lower sensitivity than NAAT)
Treatment: Varies depending on severity, with additional treatments based on
complications.
30
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
• Mild disease: supportive care
• Severe disease: remdesivir (antiviral adenosine analog) for hospitalized
adults and children age >12 and weight >40 kg; dexamethasone for those
requiring supplemental oxygen; convalescent plasma passive immunotherapy
Prevention: mask usage, social distancing (avoid crowds, remain 6 feet apart in
public)
• Quarantine of exposed individuals (14 days)
• Several novel vaccines available
– RNA based vaccine: contains mRNA for viral spike protein
– Adenovirus based vaccine: replication incompetent, expresses SARS
CoV 2 spike protein
– Recombinant protein nanoparticle, trimeric spike protein
MERS CoV (Middle Eastern Respiratory Syndrome)
Reservoir: bats and camels
Disease and transmission: similar to SARS
Recall Question
The Culex mosquito is responsible for the transmission of which of
the following viruses?
A. Dengue virus
B. West Nile virus
C. Yellow fever virus
D. Zika virus
Answer: B
30
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
RETROVIRIDAE
Family Characteristics
• Positive sense ssRNA
• Virion associated reverse transcriptase
• Enveloped
Viruses of Medical Importance
• Oncovirus group
– Human T cell leukemia/lymphotropic (HTLV)
o Adult T cell leukemia, HTLV 1 associated myelopathy (HAM)
o Causes proliferation of T cells and transformation
o Tax gene required for transformation
o Clover leaf nucleus
o C type particle (most oncoviruses, centrally located electron dense
nucleocapsid)
o Japan, Caribbean, South America
• Lentivirus group: human immunodeficiency virus (HIV); acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome Figure II 4Retro2v0i.rus Retrovirus
Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
HIV
Distinguishing Characteristics
• Homosexual men, IV drug user, sexually
• HIV virion contains:
active adult
– Enveloped, truncated, conical capsid (type D retrovirus)
• Decreasing CD4 cell count
– Two copies of ss(+)RNA
– RNA dependent DNA polymerase (reverse transcriptase) • Opportunistic infections
– Integrase • Fatigue, weight loss, lymphadenopathy,
– Protease low grade fever
30
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
gp41env Transmembrane
gp120env Surface
p17gag Matrix
p24gag Capsid
p7p9gag Nucleocapsid
Lipid bilayer Integrasepol
(host derived)
RNA
Reverse
transcriptasepol
Proteasepol
Figure II 4 21. Structure and Genes of HIV
Figure II 4 15. Structure and Genes of HIV
Table II 4 14. Important HIV Genes and Their Functions
Gene Product(s) Function
Structural Genes
Gag Group specific antigens Structural proteins
p24 Capsid protein
p7p9 Core nucleocapsid proteins
p17 Matrix protein
Pol Reverse transcriptase Produces dsDNA provirus
(extremely error prone, causes
genetic drift of envelope
glycoprotein
Integrase Viral DNA integration into host
cell DNA
Protease Cleaves viral polyprotein
Env gp120 Surface protein that binds to
CD4 and coreceptors CCR5
(macrophages) and CXCR4
(T cells); tropism; genetic drift
gp41 Transmembrane protein for viral
fusion to host cell
(Continued)
30
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
Table II 4 15. Important HIV Genes and Their Functions (Cont’d )
Gene Product(s) Function
Regulatory Genes
LTR (U3, DNA, long terminal Integration and viral gene expres
U5) repeats sion
Tat Transactivator Transactivator of transcription
(upregulation); spliced gene
Rev Regulatory protein Upregulates transport of un
spliced and spliced transcripts
to the cell cytoplasm; a spliced
gene
Nef Regulatory protein Decreases CD4 and MHC I
expression on host cells;
manipulates T cell activation
pathways; required for progres
sion to AIDS
The clinical manifestations of mutations of regulatory genes are as follows:
Gene From Mutation Outcome
Nef HIV Loss of function Slow rate of progression
to AIDS or no progression
to AIDS (non progressor)
Tat/rev HIV Loss of function Virus unable to replicate
Vif HIV Loss of function Slow rate of progression
(non progressor)
CCR5 Host cell/ Host cell Homozygous: patient
human cells macrophages/ immune to HIV
DCs
Heterozygous: slow
progression to AIDS
30
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
1 Surface gp120 of HIV binds
to CD4 of T helper cells,
gp41 macrophages, microglia, and
gp120
HIV coreceptors (CCR5 and
CXCR4 CXCR4) found on macro
CD4
phages and Th cells,
respectively.
2 HIV is taken into the cell,
Reverse
losing the envelope; the RNA
transcriptase
ss(+)RNA is uncoated.
3 The RNA is copied using the
virion associated reverse
dsDNA
transcriptase; ultimately
dsDNA with long terminal
repeats is made.
4 The DNA and integrase
Nucleus
Integrase migrate to nucleus, and the
DNA is integrated into host
DNA forming the provi
Human Provirus Human rus. The provirus remains in
DNA DNA the host DNA.
The rate of viral replication
is regulated by the activity
ss(+)RNAs of the regulatory proteins
(tat/rev, nef, etc). Tat
upregulates transcription.
Rev regulates transport of
RNA to cytoplasm.
Uncleaved Cleaved Co infections (e.g., mycobac
terial) stimulate the HIV
Nucleus
infected cells to produce
more virus.
ss(+)RNA
5 Transcription produces ss(+)
RNA, some cleaved and some
Protein synthesis remain intact.
Genomes
and cleavage
• Cleaved RNA will be used
as mRNA.
• Uncleaved RNA is used as
genomic RNA.
6 Translation produces the
Cell
membrane proteins, some of which are
polyproteins that are cleaved
by the HIV protease.
7 Assembly
8 Maturation/release of virus
Figure II 4 22. Retrovirus
II 4 F16ig.ureRetrovirus Life Cycle: HIV
Life Cycle: HIV
30
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
Reservoir: human Th cells and macrophages
Transmission: sexual contact, bloodborne (transfusions, dirty needles), vertical
Disease: acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)
• Acute HIV syndrome → asymptomatic infection → persistent, generalized
lymphadenopathy → symptomatic → AIDS defining conditions
• Homozygous CCR5 mutation → immune
• Heterozygous CCR5 mutation → slow course
• Course of the illness follows decline in CD4+ T cells
• Long term survivors may result when virus lacks functional nef protein
Acute Asymptomatic Symptomatic AIDS
1000
CD4+
800
CD4+/μ
600 Virus, p24, RNA
Ab to p24
400 Ab to env Ag
Virus p24
200 Ab
to HIV RNA
p24
12 3
Years
Break in Time
Course Varies
Figure II 4 23. Clinical Stages of HIV Infection
Figure II 4 17. Clinical Stages of HIV Infection
Stage is based primarily on CD4+ T lymphocyte count; the CD4+ T lymphocyte
count takes precedence over CD4 T lymphocyte percentage, and the percentage is
considered only if count is missing.
309
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 4 16. HIV Infection Stage* based on age specific CD4+ T Lymphocyte Count or
CD4+ T Lymphocyte Percentage of Total Lymphocytes
Age on date of CD4+
Stage T lymphocyte test
Age <1 yr Age 1–5 yrs Age ≥6 yrs
1 ≥1,500 cells/ ≥1,000 cells/ ≥500 cells/
μL, ≥34% μL, ≥30% μL, ≥26%
2 750–1,499 cells/ 500–999 cells/μL, 200–499 cells/μL,
μL, 26–33% 22–29% 14 25%
3 <750 cells/ <500 cells/μL, <200 cells/
μL, <26% <22% μL, <14%
There are 3 situations in which stage is not based on these criteria:
• If criteria for stage 0 are met, the stage is 0 regardless of criteria for
other stages (CD4 T lymphocyte test results and opportunistic illness
diagnoses).
• If criteria for stage 0 are not met and a stage 3 defining opportunistic
illness has been diagnosed, then the stage is 3 regardless of CD4
T lymphocyte test results.
• If criteria for stage 0 are not met and information on the above criteria
for other stages is missing, then the stage is unknown.
Conditions of Early Symptomatic Period
• Bacillary angiomatosis (disseminated bartonellosis)
• Candidiasis (oral or persistent vulvovaginal)
• Cervical dysplasia or carcinoma in situ
• Constitutional symptoms (fever 38.5 C [101.3 F] or diarrhea lasting >1
month)
• Hairy leukoplakia
• Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
• Listeriosis
• Pelvic inflammatory disease (especially with abscess)
• Peripheral neuropathy
Conditions Associated with AIDS
• Encephalopathy, HIV related
• Pneumonia, recurrent (leading cause of death)
• Fungal infections
• Candidiasis of esophagus, bronchi, trachea, or lungs
• Coccidioidomycosis, disseminated or extrapulmonary
• Cryptococcosis, extrapulmonary
31
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
• Histoplasmosis, disseminated or extrapulmonary
• Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia
• Malignancies: invasive cervical carcinoma; Kaposi sarcoma; Burkitt,
immunoblastic, or primary CNS lymphoma
• Viral infections: cytomegalovirus retinitis (with loss of vision) or disease
(other than liver, spleen, or nodes); herpes simplex: chronic ulcer(s) (>1
month) or bronchitis, pneumonitis, or esophagitis; progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy; wasting syndrome due to HIV (TNF α)
• Parasitic infections: cryptosporidiosis, chronic intestinal (>1 month);
isosporiasis, chronic intestinal (>1 month); toxoplasmosis of brain
• Bacterial infections
– Mycobacterium tuberculosis, any site (pulmonary or extrapulmonary)
– Mycobacterium avium complex or M. kansasii or other species or
unidentified species, disseminated or extrapulmonary
– Salmonella septicemia, recurrent
Table II 4 17. Recommended Prophylactic Regimens during HIV Infection
Disease Agent Begin Prophylaxis
Pneumocystis jirovecii <200 CD4
Toxoplasma gondii <100 CD4
Histoplasma capsulatum <100 CD4 (in endemic area)
Mycobacterium avium intracellulare <50 CD4
Cytomegalovirus <50 CD4
Cryptococcus neoformans <50 CD4
Table II 4 18. Laboratory Analysis for HIV
Purpose Test
Initial screening Serologic: fourth generation HIV 1/2
immunoassay
Confirmation Serologic: HIV 1/HIV 2 antibody differen
tiation assay; if negative or indetermi
nate, then nucleic acid amplification test
(NAAT) for viral RNA
Detection of virus in blood RT PCR*
(evaluate viral load)
Detect HIV infection in PCR*
newborns of HIV+ mother
(provirus)
Early marker of infection p24 antigen
Evaluate progression of CD4:CD8 T cell ratio
disease
*RT PCR tests for circulating viral RNA and is used to monitor the efficacy of treatment. PCR
detects integrated virus (provirus). Viral load has been demonstrated to be the best
prognostic indicator during infection.
31
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 4 19. Treatment
Mechanism Name Resistance
RT inhibitors End in “ine” Common, leads to
cross resistance
Nucleoside or non
nucleoside analogs
Protease inhibitors End in “inavir” Common via
protease mutations,
leads to cross resis
tance
HAART (highly active 2 nucleoside analogs Increasing
anti retroviral therapy) and 1 protease
inhibitor
Fusion inhibitors Fuzeon, enfuvirtide Not yet
CCR5 co receptor Maraviroc Not yet
antagonist
Integrase inhibitor Raltegravir Not yet
Prevention: safe sex/education; blood/organ screening; infection control;
vaccine development (currently none available)
Recall Question
Which of the following conditions occurs in the early symptomatic
period of HIV infection?
A. Encephalopathy
B. Extrapulmonary coccidioidomycosis
C. Oral hairy leukoplakia
D. Recurrent Salmonella septicemia
Answer: C
31
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
NEGATIVE STRANDED RNA VIRUSES
Table II 4 20. Negative Stranded RNA Viruses
Virion
Associated
Virus RNA Structure Polymerase Envelope Shape Multiplies in Major Viruses
Paramyxovirus ss( )RNA Yes Yes Helical Cytoplasm Mumps
Linear Measles
Non segmented Respiratory syncytial
Parainfluenza
Rhabdovirus ss( )RNA Yes Yes Helical, Cytoplasm Rabies
bullet
Linear Vesicular stomatitis
shaped
Non segmented
Filovirus ss( )RNA Yes Yes Helical Cytoplasm Marburg
Linear Ebola
Non segmented
Orthomyxovirus ss( ) RNA Yes Yes Helical Cytoplasm Influenza
& nucleus
Linear 8
segmented
Bunyavirus ss( )RNA Yes Yes Helical Cytoplasm California encephalitis
Pseudocircular, La Crosse encephalitis
3 segments,
Hantavirus
1 is ambisense
Arenavirus ss( )RNA Yes Yes Helical Cytoplasm Lymphocytic
choriomeningitis
Circular
Lassa fever
2 segments
1 ( )sense
1 ambisense
Mnemonic for ss( )RNA viruses: Pain Results From Our Bunions Always (given in size order). These are the negative ones because pain is a
negative thing. Another one: Bring a polymerase or fail replication.
Note that all are enveloped, all have virion associated polymerase, and all have helical nucleocapsids. The oddballs are the last three:
• The orthomyxoviruses are linear (ortho) but with 8 (ortho/octo) segments, which is one reason they can genetically “mix” it up. The
orthomyxoviruses are also odd in that they replicate in both the nucleus and cytoplasm.
• The bunyaviruses are somewhat contortionists (circular): 3 Californian contortionists
• The arenaviruses have one negative sense and one ambisense strand of RNA.
31
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Fusion with lysosome
ss(–)RNA
Golgi
ss(–)RNA
ss(–)RNA Replication
ss(+)RNA
N
5mRNAs
E.R.
ss(+)RNA
NN
Figure II 4 24. Negative Sense RNA Virus Life Cycle
Figure II 4 18. Negative Sense RNA Virus Life Cycle
PARAMYXOVIRIDAE
Family Characteristics
• Enveloped, helical nucleocapsid
• Negative sense ssRNA
Viruses of Medical Importance
• Measles
• Mumps
• Parainfluenza
• Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
• Human metapneumovirus (human MPV)
Measles Virus
Distinguishing Characteristics: single serotype; H glycoprotein and fusion
protein; no neuraminidase
Reservoir: human respiratory tract
Transmission: respiratory route
Pathogenesis: ability to cause cell: cell fusion → giant cells; virus can escape
Paramyxovirus immune detection
Figure II 4 25. Paramyxovirus
31
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
Disease
• Measles: presentation generally 3 Cs (cough, coryza, and conjunctivitis) with
photophobia; Koplik spots → maculopapular rash from ears down → giant
cell pneumonia (Warthin Finkeldey cells)
• Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis: rare late complication (mean 7–10
years); mutant measles virus persists in brain, acts as slow virus; chronic
CNS degeneration
Diagnosis: serology
Treatment: supportive, ribavirin (experimental)
Prevention: live, attenuated vaccine, MMR
Mumps Virus
Distinguishing Characteristics: negative sense ssRNA; helical; enveloped; single
HN glycoprotein, also F protein; single serotype
Reservoir: human respiratory tract
Transmission: person to person via respiratory droplets
Pathogenesis: lytic infection of epithelial cells of upper respiratory tract and
parotid glands → spread throughout body
Disease: mumps
• Asymptomatic to bilateral parotitis with fever, headache, and malaise
• Complications include pancreatitis, orchitis (leads to sterility in males), and
meningoencephalitis
Diagnosis: clinical; serology; ELISA, IFA, hemagglutination inhibition
Treatment: supportive
Prevention: live, attenuated vaccine, MMR
31
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 4 21. Additional Paramyxoviruses
Virus Transmission Disease(s) Diagnosis Treatment/Prevention
Parainfluenza Respiratory Older children and adults: RT PCR Supportive/none
subglottal swelling; hoarse,
barking cough
Infants: colds, bronchiolitis,
pneumonia, croup
RSV Respiratory Adults: colds; infants/ Indirect fluorescent Ribavirin and
preemies: bronchiolitis and antibody, enzyme anti RSV Abs/none
necrosis of bronchioles, linked Palivizumab blocks
atypical pneumonia (low immunosorbent fusion protein
fever, tachypnea, tachycardia, assay, RT PCR
expiratory wheeze)
Human Respiratory Common cold (15% in kids), RT PCR Supportive/none
metapneumovirus bronchiolitis, pneumonia
RT PCR: reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
RHABDOVIRIDAE
Family Characteristics
• Negative sense ssRNA
• Bullet shaped
• Enveloped, helical
Viruses of Medical Importance
• Rabies
Rabies Virus
Reservoir: sylvatic animals (bats, raccoons, foxes, skunks) in U.S.; dogs in rest of
world
Transmission: bite or contact with rabid animal
Figure II 4Rhab2d6o.virusRhabdovirus
Pathogenesis: After contact, virus binds to peripheral nerves by binding to
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor or indirectly into the muscle at site of inoculation;
virus travels by retrograde axoplasmic transport to dorsal root ganglia and spinal
KEY VIGNETTE CLUES cord; once virus gains access to spinal cord, brain becomes rapidly infected.
Rabies
Disease: rabies
• Patient bitten by bat or dog
• Nonspecific flu like illness followed by neurologic symptoms of
• Influenza like prodrome: hydrophobia, hydrophobia, seizures, disorientation, hallucination, coma, and death
hallucination, coma, death • With rare exception, rabies fatal unless treated by immunoprophylaxis
31
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
Diagnosis: clinical; Negri bodies, intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies (brain
biopsy); DFA (impression smears of corneal epithelial cells), PCR (usually too late)
Treatment: none if symptoms are evident; if suspect: postexposure prophylaxis 1
dose of human rabies immunoglobulin (hRIG); 4 doses of rabies vaccine (day of
and then days 3, 7, 14); killed virus vaccine
Prevention: vaccine for high risk individuals; vaccination program for domestic
animals (U.S.)
FILOVIRIDAE
Family Characteristics
• Negative sense ssRNA
• Enveloped, helical
• Filamentous
Viruses of Medical Importance
• Ebola virus :Zaire species most virulent (2014–2015 outbreak in West
Africa), 70% mortality
• Marburg virus
Reservoir: bats suspected (Ebola); bats confirmed (Marburg)
Transmission (Ebola): direct contact with body fluids/blood/skin of infected
patients or infected animals; ingestion of meat from infected animals
Pathogenesis (Ebola)
• Virus infects many cell types (endothelial, epithelial, fibroblasts, etc); macro
phages, and dendrite cells first cells likely to be infected
• Virus delivered to regional lymph nodes, then to bloodstream
• Systemic inflammatory response induces cytokine storm, which results in
tissue damage including vascular leak, SI dysfunction, and eventual multi
organ failure
Ebola
Disease
• Incubation period ~6–12 days
• Non specific flu like illness (fever, chills, general malaise)
• Fatigue, headaches, vomiting and diarrhea
• Massive hemorrhage not common, although bleeding via bloody stool,
petechiae, or mucosal bleeding can be
• GI manifestations important in severe illness, with vomiting and diarrhea
leading to fluid loss
• Rash and meningoencephalitis may occur
31
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Diagnosis: determine likelihood of exposure; rapid antigen test (screen) but RT
PCR is confirmatory
Treatment
• Symptomatic
• Non approved anti virals (clinical trials): favipiravir, brincidofovir
• Ebola specific treatments in development include monoclonal antibodies
targeting surface GP and anti RNA
Prevention: infection control precautions (quarantine, travel restrictions); recent
development of replication competent, live, attenuated recombinant vesicular
stomatitis virus (rVSV) vaccine
Recall Question
Mumps virus is transmitted via which of the following routes?
A. Blood to blood contact
B. Breast milk
C. Respiratory droplets
D. Sexual contact
Answer: C
31
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
ORTHOMYXOVIRIDAE
Family Characteristics
• Negative sense ssRNA
• Enveloped
• Segmented (8 segments)
• Helical
Viruses of Medical Importance
• Influenza A
• Influenza B Figure II 4Or2th7o.myxoOvrirthuosmyxovirus
Influenza Virus
Distinguishing Features KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
• Envelope contains two glycoproteins, H and N Influenza
• Used to serotype virus
Patient with headache, malaise, fever,
myalgia, cough
Reservoir
• Influenza A (birds, pigs, humans)
• Influenza B (humans only)
Transmission
• Direct contact
• Respiratory
• 1997 H5N1 strain jumped directly from birds to humans
• 2009 H1N1 strain—quadruple reassortment virus (North American swine,
avian, human; Asian and European swine)
Pathogenesis
• Antigenic drift
– Influenza A and B
– Slight changes in antigenicity due to mutations in H and/or N
– Causes epidemics
• Antigenic shift
– Influenza A only
– Rare genetic reassortment
– Coinfection of cells with 2 different strains of influenza A (H5N1 and
H3N2); reassortment of segments of genome
– Production of a new agent to which population has no immunity
– Responsible for pandemics
31
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Disease: influenza
• Headache and malaise
• Fever, chills, myalgias, anorexia
• Bronchiolitis, croup, otitis media, vomiting (younger children)
• Pneumonia/secondary bacterial infections
• Can lead to Reye syndrome or Guillain Barré syndrome
Diagnosis: rapid tests (serology); clinical symptoms plus season
Treatment
• Amantadine/rimantadine (current isolates are commonly resistant)
– Inhibit viral uncoating
– Administer orally
• Zanamivir/oseltamivir
– Neuraminidase inhibitors
– Zanamivir is inhaled
– Oseltamivir is given orally
Prevention
• Killed vaccine
– Two strains of influenza A (H3N2, H1N1, for example) and one strain
of influenza B are incorporated into the vaccine
• Live, attenuated vaccine
– Intranasal administration
– Similar composition
– No longer recommended
32
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
BUNYAVIRIDAE KEY VIGNETTE CLUES
Hantavirus
Family Characteristics
• Patient with acute respiratory distress
Table II 4 22. Bunyaviridae • Four corners region
Virus Transmission Disease Diagnosis • Exposure to rodent excrement
California Mosquito Viral encephalitis Serology • Spring/early summer incidence
and
LaCrosse
encephalitis
Hantavirus Rodent Hantavirus pulmonary RT PCR
excrement, syndrome (cough, myalgia,
(sin nombre)
four corners dyspnea, tachycardia,
region, rainy pulmonary edema and
season effusion, and hypotension
[mortality 50%])
• Negative sense ssRNA
• Enveloped viruses
• Three segments, one ambisense
• Mostly arboviruses, except Hantavirus
Viruses of Medical Importance
• California encephalitis
• LaCrosse encephalitis
• Hantavirus (sin nombre)
ARENAVIRIDAE
Family Characteristics
• Negative sense ssRNA
• Pleomorphic, enveloped
• Virions have a sandy appearance (ribosomes in virion)
• Two segments, one ambisense
Viruses of Medical Importance
• Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV)
• Lassa fever virus
32
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 4 23. Arenaviridae
Virus Transmission Disease Diagnosis Treatment
Lymphocytic Mice and Influenza Serology, Supportive,
choriomen pet ham like with level 3 ribavirin
ingitis virus sters (U.S.) meningeal isolation
signs
Lassa fever Rodents, Hemorrhag Serology, Supportive,
human to ic fever with level 4
ribavirin
human 50% fatality isolation
(West rate
Africa)
DOUBLE STRANDED RNA VIRUSES
REOVIRIDAE
Reovirus Table II 4 24. Double Stranded RNA Viruses
Figure II 4 28. Reovirus
RNA
Structure Polymerase Envelope Shape Major Viruses
Reovirus Linear Yes Naked Icosahe Reovirus
dsRNA dral Rotavirus
10–11 Double Colorado Tick
segments shelled Fever Virus
Table II 4 25. Reoviridae
Virus Transmission Disease Diagnosis Treatment/Prevention
Reovirus Fecal oral, Common cold, Serology Self limiting/none
respiratory gastroenteritis
Rotavirus Fecal oral Gastroenteritis, no Enzyme linked Live, attenuated
blood or pus immunosorbent assay vaccine, oral
(stool)
32
CHAPTER 4 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT VIRUSES
PRION DISEASES
Infectious proteins; very stable, protease resistant
• Cellular prion protein (PrPC) displayed on neurons: protease sensitive pro
tein of unknown function, encoded on chromosome 20
• Scrapie prion protein (PrPSc) cleaves PrPC from cell and causes refolding
into PrPSc
• Neuron makes new PrPC and traffics to cell surface
• PrPSc cleaves this PrPC and causes refolding
• Cycle continues until aggregate of PrPSc forms and is ingested by neuron;
causes neurodegeneration and spongiform encephalopathy
Table II 4 26. Prion Diseases
Infectious
Disease Agent Host Comments
Kuru Prion Human Subacute spongiform
encephalopathy (SSE);
Fore Tribe, New Guinea;
cannibalism
Creutzfeldt Jakob Prion Human SSE
disease (and variant)
Genetic predisposition;
ingestion of infected
cow brains
Gerstmann Prion Human SSE
Sträussler Scheinker
Fatal familial Prion Human SSE
insomnia
Scrapie Prion Sheep SSE: scraping their
wool off on fences
32
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 4 27. Slow Conventional Viruses (Viruses)
Disease Infectious Agent Host Comments
Measles SSPE Virus Human having Subacute
had measles sclerosing
panencephalitis
AIDS dementia HIV Human Dementia
PML JC virus Human Progressive
multifocal
leukoencepha
lopathy
Recall Question
By what route is the rotavirus vaccine administered?
A. Deep intramuscular
B. Intranasal
C. Oral
D. Subcutaneous
Answer: C
32
Medically Relevant Fungi 5#
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Demonstrate understanding of mycology and fungal morphology
❏ Differentiate between nonsystemic fungal infections and deep fungal
infections
MYCOLOGY
Mycology is the study of fungi (molds, yeasts, and mushrooms). All fungi have the
following characteristics:
• Eukaryotic (e.g., true nucleus, 80S ribosomes, mitochondria, as are
humans)
• Complex carbohydrate cell walls: chitin, glucan, and mannan
• Ergosterol is major membrane sterol
– Imidazole antifungals inhibit synthesis of ergosterol
– Polyene antifungals bind more tightly to ergosterol than to cholesterol
FUNGAL MORPHOLOGY
Hyphae are filamentous cellular units of molds and mushrooms.
• Septate hyphae have cross walls and fairly regular width (tube like).
• Nonseptate hyphae have no cross walls, broad hyphae with irregular
width, and broad angle of branching.
Figure II 5 1N.onseNpotantseeptate Hyphae Hyphae Figure II 5 2. Septate HyphaeHyphaeSeptate
32
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
The mycelium is the mat of hyphae. Yeasts are single celled (round to oval) fungi.
Yeasts
Figure II 5 3. Yeasts
Fungi able to convert from hyphal to yeast (or yeast like) forms are called dimor
phic fungi. They are thermally dimorphic: mold in the “cold” (25.0 C [77.0 F]),
yeast in the beast (37.0 C [98.6 F]).
Key dimorphic fungi include Histoplasma, Blastomyces, Coccidioides, and
Sporothrix.
Dimorphic Fungi
Figure II 5 4. Dimorphic Fungi
Pseudohyphae (Candida albicans) are hyphae with constrictions at each septum.
Figure II 5 5.
Candida Pseudohyphae
Candida Pseudohyphae
32
CHAPTER 5 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT FUNGI
Spore types include:
• Conidia: asexual spores; formed off of hyphae; common; airborne
• Blastoconidia: “buds” on yeasts (asexual budding daughter yeast cells)
• Arthroconidia: asexual spores formed by a “joint”
• Spherules and endospores (Coccidioides): spores inside spherules in
tissue
Conidia
Conidia Blastoconidia
Figure II 5 7. Blastoconidia
Figure II 5Arthr8o.coniAdriathroconidia Spherules and Endospores
Figure II 5 9. Endospores
and Spherules
Diagnosis
Diagnosis begins with microscopic methods and specialized stains. Diagnosis then
continues with the following:
• Culture (may take several weeks): special fungal media include inhibitory
mold agar as modification of Sabouraud with antibiotics:
– Sabouraud agar and blood agar (both with antibiotics)
– Culture identifies fungal morphology and PCR with nucleic acid probes
• Serology includes antibody screen and complement fixation and looks for
patient antibody
• Fungal antigen detection (CSF, serum): cryptococcal capsular polysaccha
ride detection by latex particle agglutination (LPA) or counter immuno
electrophoresis
• Skin test is most useful for epidemiology or demonstration of anergy to an
agent known to be infective to a patient (grave prognosis); otherwise, like
tuberculosis, skin test only indicates exposure to agent
32
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 5 1. Microscopic Methods/Special Fungal Stains
Preparation Fungal Color Notes
KOH wet mount Colorless (hyaline) refractive Heat gently; let sit 10 min; dissolves
green or light olive to brown human cells
(KOH degrades human tissues
(dematiaceous) fungal elements
leaving hyphae and yeasts visible)
PAS Hot pink
Silver stain Gray to black Pneumocystis
Calcofluor white (can be done on Bright blue white on black Scrapings or sections; fluorescent
wet mounts) microscope needed
India ink wet mount of CSF Colorless cells with halos Only “rules in”; insensitive; misses 50%
sediment (capsule) on a black particulate
background (Cryptococcus
neoformans)
Cryptococcus neoformans
Figure II 5 10.
Cryptococcus neoformans
NONSYSTEMIC FUNGAL INFECTIONS
Superficial Infections (Keratinized Tissues)
Malassezia furfur
Normal skin flora (lipophilic yeast)
Diseases include:
• Pityriasis or tinea versicolor
– Superficial infection of keratinized cells
– Moist, warm climates predispose
– Hypopigmented spots on chest/back (blotchy suntan)
– KOH mount of skin scales: spaghetti and meatballs (bacon and
eggs); yeast clusters and short, curved septate hyphae
– Coppery orange fluorescence under Wood lamp (UV)
– Treatment is topical selenium sulfide or topical azole antifungal
• Fungemia in premature infants on intravenous lipid supplements
32
CHAPTER 5 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT FUNGI
Figure II Fig5ure 11.II 5 1.MaMlasasleazssiaezia furfur furfur
Cutaneous Fungal Infections (without Systemic Disease)
Yeast skin infections
• Commonly cutaneous or mucocutaneous candidiasis
• May disseminate in compromised patients
• Discussed with opportunistic fungi
Dermatophytes (group of fungi)
• Filamentous fungi (monomorphic)
• Infect only skin and hair and/or nails (do not disseminate)
• Three genera:
– Trichophyton: infects skin, hair, and nails
– Microsporum: infects hair and skin
– Epidermophyton: infects nails and skin
Figure II 5 12. Dermatophyte
Figure II 5 2. Dermatophyte
32
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Diseases include dermatophytic infections (tineas, also called ringworm). Itching
is the most common symptom of all tineas.
• Tinea capitis: ringworm of the scalp (most serious form is favus (tinea
favosa), which is very contagious and causes permanent hair loss)
• Tinea barbae: ringworm of the bearded region
• Tinea corporis: dermatophytic infection of the glabrous skin
• Tinea cruris: jock itch
• Tinea pedis: athlete’s foot
• Tinea unguium: ringworm of the nails
If symptoms include high inflammation, it is generally from animals (zoophilic).
If symptoms include little inflammation, it is generally from humans.
Diagnosis is made with Microsporum (fluoresces a bright yellow green [Wood
lamp]) and KOH mount of nail or skin scrapings (shows arthroconidia and
hyphae).
Treatment is topical imidazole or tolnaftate (use oral imidazole or griseofulvin
where hairs are infected or skin contact hurts). Keep areas dry.
ID reaction
(Dermatophytid) = allergic response to circulating fungal antigens
Subcutaneous Mycoses
Sporothrix schenckii
Dimorphic fungus
Environmental form: on plant material, worldwide as hyphae with rosettes and
sleeves of conidia
• Traumatic implantation (rose or plum tree thorns, wire/sphagnum moss)
Tissue form: cigar shaped yeast in tissue
Diseases include:
• Sporotrichosis (rose gardener disease): subcutaneous or lymphocutane
ous lesions; treatment: itraconazole or potassium iodide in milk
• Pulmonary (acute or chronic) sporotrichosis; people with alcoholism,
particularly those who are homeless in urban areas (alcoholic rose
garden sleeper disease)
Treatment is itraconazole for bone/joint infection and amphotericin B for severe/
systemic infection.
33
CHAPTER 5 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT FUNGI
Figure II 5 13. Sporothrix Hyphae
Sporothrix Hyphae Sporothrix Yeast
Figure II 5 3. Sporothrix
Recall Question
Silver stain is used to identify which of the following fungi?
A. Blastomyces
B. Coccidioides
C. Histoplasma
D. Pneumocystis
Answer: D
SYSTEMIC FUNGAL INFECTIONS
There are 4 important classical pathogens in the United States. All of them cause
acute pulmonary (asymptomatic or self resolving in 95% of cases), chronic
pulmonary, or disseminated infection.
• Histoplasma
• Coccidioides
• Blastomyces
• Paracoccidioides
Diagnosis is made with sputum cytology (calcofluor white helpful); sputum
culture on blood agar; and special fungal media (inhibitory mold agar, Sab
ouraud). Peripheral blood culture is useful for Histoplasma since it circulates in
reticuloendothelial system (RES) cells.
Histoplasma Capsulatum
Dimorphic fungus
Environmental form: hyphae with microconidia and tuberculate macroconidia
• Endemic region: Eastern Great Lakes, Ohio, Mississippi, and Missouri
River beds
• Found in soil (dust) enriched with bird or bat feces
• Spelunking (cave exploring), cleaning chicken coops, or bulldozing
starling roosts
33
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Highly endemic
Moderately endemic
Mildly endemic
Suspected endemic
Figure II 5 4. Histoplasma Endemic Region
Tissue form: small intracellular yeasts with narrow neck on bud; no capsule
• Facultative intracellular parasite found in reticuloendothelial cells
Figure II 5 15. Histoplasma (tiny; can get 30 or so in a human cell)
Histoplasma Environmental Form
Environmental Form
White cell
may contain
Nucleus many yeast
cells
Yeast cell
Figure II 5 17. Human RES Cell
Figure II 5 5. Human RES Cell Figure II 5 6. Histoplasma Capsulatum
Yeast Cells within an RES Cell
Diseases include fungus flu (a pneumonia):
• Asymptomatic or acute (but self resolving) pneumonia with flu like
symptomatology
• Hepatosplenomegaly may be present even in acute pulmonary infections
(facultative intracellular RES)
• Very common in summer in endemic areas: children or newcomers (80%
of adults are skin test positive in some areas)
33
CHAPTER 5 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT FUNGI
• Lesions tend to calcify as they heal
• Relapse potential increases with T cell immunosuppression
• Disseminated infections: mucocutaneous lesions common; also common
in AIDS patients in endemic area
Treatment is itraconazole for mild disease and amphotericin B for severe disease.
Coccidioides Immitis
Dimorphic fungus
Figure II 5 18.
Coccidioides immitis Figure CoccidIIioide5s 20.immitis
Coccicioides immitis
Coccidioides immitisSpherules Spherules
Coccidioides Immitis
Environmental form: hyphae breaking up into arthroconidia found in
desert sand
• Endemic region: Southwestern United States—Southern California
(especially San Joaquin Valley), Arizona, New Mexico, Texas, Nevada
• Arthroconidia are inhaled, round up, and enlarged, becoming spherules
inside, which the cytoplasm walls off, forming endospores
Tissue form: spherules with endospores
Disease: Valley fever (asymptomatic to self resolving pneumonia)
• Good prognostic signs: desert bumps (erythema nodosum) and arthritis
• Very common in endemic region
• Pulmonary lesions tend to calcify as they heal
• Systemic infection is a problem in AIDS and immunocompromised
patients in endemic regions (meningitis, mucocutaneous lesions)
• Tend to disseminate in third trimester of pregnancy
33
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Treatment is an azole (itraconazole) for mild to moderate disease and amphotericin
B for severe disease.
Highly endemic Established endemic
Suspected endemic
Figure II 5 7. Coccidioides Endemic Region
Recall Question
Which of the following fungi endemic to Ohio is found in soil
enriched with bird feces?
A. Blastomyces dermatitidis
B. Histoplasma capsulatum
C. Sporothrix schenckii
D. Trichophyton
Answer: B
Blastomyces Dermatitidis
Dimorphic fungus
Environmental form: hyphae with nondescript conidia (i.e., no fancy arrange
ments)
• No definitive association, but possible association with rotting wood,
e.g., beaver dams
• Endemic region: Upper Great Lakes, Ohio, Mississippi River beds, plus
southeastern seaboard of the U.S. and northern Minnesota into Canada
33
CHAPTER 5 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT FUNGI
Figure II 5 8. Blastomycosis Endemic Region
Tissue form: broad based budding yeasts and a double refractile cell wall (not
capsule)
Hyphae with Conidia Broad Based Budding Yeasts
Figure II 5 21. BlastomycesFigure II 5 23. Blastomyces dermatitidis
Figure II 5 9. Blastomyces Dermatitidis
dermatitidis Hyphae with ConidBiaroad Based Budding Yeast
Disease: Blastomycosis
• Acute and chronic pulmonary disease
• Considered less likely to self resolve than Histoplasma or Coccidioides, so
many physicians will treat even acute infections
• Disseminated disease
Treatment is itraconazole (mild/moderate disease) and amphotericin B (severe/
systemic disease).
Paracoccidioides Brasiliensis
Dimorphic fungus
Environmental form: septate hyphae with intercalated chlamydoconidia
Endemic region: South and Central America (highest incidence Brazil)
Areas with high humidity, moderate temperature, heavy vegetation, and acidic soil
Tissue form: round yeast cells with double refractory walls and multiple buds
335
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Paracoccidioides Hyphae Paracoccidioides Yeast
Figure II 5 10. Paracoccidioides
Disease. Most infections are subclinical.
• Acute (juvenile) form: flu like symptoms; lymphadenopathy and hepato
splenomegaly; skin lesions
• Chronic (adult) form: primary pulmonary infection; pulmonary fibrosis,
bullae and emphysematous changes (35% of patients); oral and cutaneous
lesions
Treatment is typically itraconazole; for severe disease nonresponsive to other
antifungals, consider amphotericin B.
Equator
Tropic of Capricorn
Figure II 5 11. Paracoccidioides Endemic Region
33
CHAPTER 5 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT FUNGI
Opportunistic Fungi
Aspergillus fumigatus
Monomorphic filamentous fungus
• Dichotomously branching
• Generally acute angles
• Frequent septate hyphae with 45° angles
• One of our major recyclers: compost pits, moldy marijuana
Aspergillus Showing Monomorphic Aspergillus fumigatus
Figure II 5 24. Aspergillus Showing
Filamentous Fungus
Monomorphic Filamentous Fungus
Figure II 5 12. Aspergillus
Disease. Predisposing conditions include the following:
• Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA)/asthma, cystic fibrosis
(growing in mucous plugs in the lung but not penetrating the lung tissue)
• Fungus ball: free in preformed lung cavities (surgical removal to reduce
coughing, which may induce pulmonary hemorrhage)
• Invasive aspergillosis/severe neutropenia, CGD, CF, burns
– Invades tissues causing infarcts and hemorrhage
– Nasal colonization, leading to pneumonia or meningitis
– Cellulitis: in burn patients; may also disseminate
Treatment is voriconazole for invasive aspergillosis and aspergilloma; glucocor
ticoids and itraconazole for ABPA.
Candida albicans (and other species of Candida)
• Yeast endogenous to our mucous membrane normal flora
• C. albicans yeasts form germ tubes at 37 C in serum
• Forms pseudohyphae and true hyphae when it invades tissues (nonpatho
genic Candida do not)
33
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Diseases/Predisposing Conditions
• Perleche: crevices of mouth/malnutrition
• Oral thrush/prematurity, antibiotic use, immunocompromised host, AIDS
• Esophagitis/antibiotic use, immunocompromised host, AIDS
• Gastritis/antibiotic use, immunocompromised host, AIDS
• Septicemia (with endophthalmitis and macronodular skin lesions)/
immuno compromised, cancer and intravenous patients
• Endocarditis (with transient septicemias)/intravenous drug abusers
• Cutaneous infections/obesity and infants; patients with rubber gloves
• Yeast vaginitis/particularly a problem in diabetic women
• Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis/endocrine defects; anergy to Candida
Diagnosis is made with KOH (pseudohyphae, true hyphae, budding yeasts) and
septicemia (culture lab identification: biochemical tests/formation of germ tubes).
Treatment is topical or oral imidazole; nystatin; amphotericin B or fluconazole for
disseminated disease.
Budding Germ True
Pseudohyphae
Yeasts Tubes Hyphae
Figure II 5Figure25. II 5Can1d3i.da Candida aallbbiiccaannss
Cryptococcus neoformans
Encapsulated yeast (monomorphic)
Environmental Source: soil enriched with pigeon droppings
Disease. Predisposing conditions include meningitis/Hodgkins and AIDS (the
dominant meningitis), as well as acute pulmonary infection (usually asymptom
atic)/pigeon breeders.
Diagnosis of meningitis is made with CSF.
• Detect capsular antigen in CSF (by latex particle agglutination or counter
immunoelectrophoresis)
• India ink mount (misses 50%) of CSF sediment to find budding yeasts
with capsular “halos”
• Cultures (urease positive yeast)
33
CHAPTER 5 | MEDICALLY RELEVANT FUNGI
Treatment is AMB+5FC (flucytosine) until afebrile and culture negative (mini
mum of 10 weeks), then fluconazole.
Figure II 5 14. Cryptococcus Neoformans
Mucor, Rhizopus, Absidia (Zygomycophyta)
Nonseptate filamentous fungi
Environmental Source: soil; sporangiospores are inhaled
Disease. These fungi penetrate without respect to anatomical barriers, progressing
rapidly from sinuses into the brain tissue.
• Rhinocerebral infection caused by Mucor (or other zygomycophyta) [old
names included mucormycosis = phycomycosis = zygomycosis]
• Characterized by paranasal swelling, necrotic tissues, hemorrhagic
exudates from nose and eyes, mental lethargy
• Occurs in ketoacidotic diabetic and leukemic patients
Diagnosis is made with KOH of tissue; broad ribbon like nonseptate hyphae with
about 90° angles on branches.
Treatment is debridement of necrotic tissue and amphotericin B started immedi
ately. Fatality rate is high due to rapid growth and invasion.
Figure II 5 26. Nonseptate Hyphae
Figure II 5 15. wiNthonseptBatreoad HAypnhgalees with Broad Angles
33
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Pneumocystis jirovecii (formerly P. carinii)
Fungus (based on molecular techniques like ribotyping)
• Obligate extracellular parasite
• Silver stained cysts in tissues
Disease: interstitial pneumonia
• Pneumonia in AIDS patients even with prophylaxis (mean CD4+/mm3 of
26), malnourished babies, premature neonates, and some other IC adults
and kids
• Symptoms: fever, cough, shortness of breath; sputum nonproductive except
in smokers
• Serum leaks into alveoli, producing an exudate with foamy or honeycomb
appearance on H&E stain (silver stain reveals the holes in exudate are
actually the cysts and trophozoites, which do not stain with H&E)
• X ray: patchy infiltrative (ground glass appearance); lower lobe periphery
may be spared
NOTE Diagnosis is made with silver staining cysts in bronchial alveolar lavage fluids or
biopsy.
Fungi are starting to develop drug
resistance by mechanisms analogous to Treatment is trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole for mild disease and dapsone for
those seen in bacteria. moderate/severe disease.
• Resistance to azoles becoming
widespread
• Aspergillus, Candida, Cryptococcus
Figure II 5 16. Pneumocystis, Silver Stain, Exudate
Pneumocystis, silver stain, exudate
34
Medical Parasitology 6
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Demonstrate understanding of classification of parasites
❏ Use knowledge of important protozoan parasites
❏ Answer questions about important metazoan parasites
CLASSIFICATION OF PARASITES
Medical parasitology is the study of the invertebrate animals and the diseases they
cause. Parasites are classified as protozoans or metazoans.
Table II 6 1. Protozoa versus Metazoa
Protozoa Metazoa
Complexity Single celled Multicellular
Onset of clinical Days to weeks Typically >1 month
symptoms
Diagnostic forms Cysts and trophozoites Eggs
Elevated immune Typically neutrophils Eosinophils
levels
The tables list the protozoan and metazoan classifications.
Table II 6 2. Protozoans NOTE
Common Within these tables, the most important
Name Amebae Flagellates Apicomplexa organisms in the United States are set in
boldface.
Important Entamoeba LUMINAL (GUT, UG) BLOOD/TISSUE
genera
Naegleria Trichomonas Plasmodium
Acanthamoeba Giardia Toxoplasma
HEMOFLAGELLATES Babesia
Leishmania INTESTINAL
Trypanosoma Cryptosporidium
Cystoisospora
34
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 6 3. Metazoans: Worms*
Phylum Roundworms Flat worms (Platyhelminthes)
Class Nematodes** Trematodes Cestodes
Common name Roundworms Flukes Tapeworms
Genera Necator Fasciola Diphyllobothrium
Enterobius Fasciolopsis Hymenolepis
uchereria/Brugia Paragonimus Taenia
Clonorchis Echinococcus
Ascaris and Ancylostoma
Toxocara, Trichuris & Trichinella Schistosoma
Onchocerca
Dracunculus
Eye worm (Loa loa)
Strongyloides
*Metazoans also include the Arthropoda, which serve mainly as intermediate hosts (the crustaceans) or as vectors of disease (the Arachnida
and Insecta).
**Nematodes mnemonic.
Hosts
The infected host is classified as:
• Intermediate: host in which larval or asexual stages develop
• Definitive: host in which adult or sexual stages occur
Vectors
Vectors are living transmitters (e.g., a fly) of disease and may be:
• Mechanical: transport parasite but there is no development of parasite in
the vector
• Biologic: some stages of life cycle occur
Life Cycle Forms
Life cycle forms may be:
• Infectious, e.g., cysts in protozoan infections, eggs in helminth infections
• Diagnostic, e.g., trophozoite in protozoan infections, eggs/worm in
helminth infection
34
CHAPTER 6 | MEDICAL PARASITOLOGY
IMPORTANT PROTOZOAN PARASITES
Table II 6 4. Protozoan Parasites
Disease/Organs Most
Species Affected Form/Transmission Diagnosis Treatment
Entamoeba Amebiasis: dysentery Cysts Trophozoites or cysts Metronidazole
histolytica Inverted flask shaped Fecal oral in stool: followed by
lesions in large transmission: paromomycin
intestine with extension water, fresh
to peritoneum and liver, fruits, and
lungs, brain, heart vegetables
Blood and pus in stools
Liver abscesses
Serology:
Nuclei have sharp
central karyosome
and fine chromatin
“spokes.”
Giardia lamblia Giardiasis: Cysts Pear shaped Metronidazole
Ventral sucking disk Fecal (human, trophozoites with
attaches to lining of beaver, muskrat, bilobed nuclei or
duodenal wall, causing etc.), oral cysts in stool, or fecal
a fatty, foul smelling transmission antigen test
diarrhea (diarrhea → (water, food, day
malabsorption care, oral anal
duodenum, jejunum) sex)
“Falling leaf” motility
Cryptosporidium Cryptosporidiosis: Cysts Acid fast oocysts in Nothing is
sp. transient diarrhea in Undercooked stool: Biopsy shows 100% effective;
C. parvum healthy hosts; severe, meat, water; dots (cysts) in nitazoxanide,
immunocompromised not killed by intestinal glands paromomycin, or
hosts chlorination azithromycin is drug
of choice
(Continued )
34
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 6 4. Protozoan Parasites (Cont’d)
Disease/Organs Most
Species Affected Form/Transmission Diagnosis Treatment
Cystoisospora Transient diarrhea in Oocysts Acid fast, elliptical TMP SMX or
belli AIDS patients; diarrhea Ingestion oocysts in stool; pyrimethamine/
mimics giardiasis Fecal oral contain 2 sporocysts sulfadiazine
malabsorption each with 4
syndrome sporozoites
Cyclospora Self limited diarrhea in Oocysts, water, Fecal; acid fast, TMP SMX
cayetanensis immunocompetent; contaminated spherical oocysts;
prolonged, severe imported food contain 2 sporocysts
diarrhea in AIDS each with 2
patients sporozoites; UV
fluorescence
Microsporidia Microsporidiosis: Spores ingested Gram (+), acid fast None proven to be
(6 genera) persistent, debilitating spores in stool or effective
diarrhea in AIDS biopsy material
patients; other spp →
neurologic, hepatitis,
disseminated
Trichomonas Trichomoniasis: often Trophozoites Motile trophozoites in Metronidazole
vaginalis asymptomatic or frothy Sexual methylene blue wet
(urogenital) vaginal discharge mount; corkscrew
Colpitis macularis motility
Free Living Ameba
• Occur in water or soil (Naegleria, Acanthamoeba)
• Occur in contact lens saline solutions (Acanthamoeba): cysts from dust
contaminate
Table II 6 5. Free Living Ameba That Occasionally Infects Humans
Species Disease/Locale Form/Transmission Diagnosis Treatment
Naegleria Primary amebic Free living ameba Motile trophozoites Amphotericin B
meningoencephalitis picked up while in CSF (rarely successful
(PAM): severe swimming or diving in Culture on plates
prefrontal headache, very warm fresh water seeded with gram
nausea, high fever, negative bacteria;
altered sense of ameba will leave trails
smell; often fatal
Acanthamoeba Keratitis; Free living ameba in Star shaped cysts on Keratitis: topical
granulomatous contaminated contact biopsy; rarely seen in miconazole and
amebic encephalitis lens solution (airborne CSF culture as above propamidine
(GAE) in cysts) isethionate; GAE:
immunocompromised Not certain for GAE: ketoconazole,
patients; insidious inhalation or contact sulfamethazine
onset but progressive with contaminated soil (rarely successful)
to death or water
344
CHAPTER 6 | MEDICAL PARASITOLOGY
Recall Question
Which of the following parasites demonstrates “falling leaf” motility
on microscopy?
A. Entamoeba histolytica
B. Giardia lamblia
C. Cryptosporidium parvum
D. Cystoisospora belli
Answer: B
Plasmodium Species
Cycle in
Mosquito
Ruptured
oocyst Migrate to Exoerythrocytic
salivary gland Sporozoites migrate
into the bloodstream
Stomach Sporozoites invade the Liver
lumen parenchymal cells Hypnozoites
(sleeping forms)
of the liver
P. vivax+
P. ovale
Zygote Penetrates Relapse
stomach wall
and divides
Division toform
primary tissue
Fertilization schizont
Liver
Maturation division
ingested
Blood
Gametocytesmosquitoes
by the Some merozoites
differentiate into
sexual forms
Erythrocytic
Schizont
Trophozoite
ocyt
Asexual cycle
Erythr Cycle in
d
ti
e
m
te
e
rmi
b
n
e
e
t
s
ween
the Invasionof Humans
febrile episodes
Erythrocytic
Figure II 6 1. Plasmodium Life Cycle
Figure II 6 1. Plasmodium Life Cycle
345
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Each Plasmodium has 2 distinct hosts: vertebrate (such as the human) where asexual
phase (schizogony) takes place in the liver and red blood cells, and arthropod host
(Anopheles mosquito) where gametogony (sexual phase) and sporogony take place.
• Cause disease by various mechanisms, including metabolism of hemoglo
bin and lysis of infected cells leading to anemia and agglutination of
infected red blood cells
• Cause paroxysms (chills, fever spike, and malarial rigors) when infected
red blood cells are lysed, liberating a new crop of merozoites
HbS heterozygote—selective protection against P. falciparum. Duffy blood group
Ag—receptor for P. vivax. Other abnormal hemoglobins (e.g., thalassemia) are
indigestible to all Plasmodium spp.
Table II 6 6. Plasmodium Species
Species Important Features Blood Smears Liver Stages Treatment**
Plasmodium vivax 48 hour fever Enlarged host Persistent Chloroquine, then
spikes cells; ameboid hypnozoites primaquine
trophozoites Relapse*
Plasmodium ovale 48 hour fever Oval, jagged, Persistent Chloroquine, then
(2 substrains) spikes infected RBCs hypnozoites primaquine
Relapse
Plasmodium 72 hour fever Bar and band No persistent Chloroquine (no radical
malariae spikes; forms; rosette stage*; cure necessary)
recrudescence* schizonts recrudescence*
Plasmodium Irregular fever Multiple ring forms No persistent • Chloroquine for
falciparum spikes; causes crescent shaped stage*; susceptible, non
cerebral malaria gametes recrudescence severe cases
• Atovaquone proguanil,
artemether
lumefantrine,
mefloquine for
resistant, non severe
cases
• Quinine/quinidine for
severe cases
Plasmodium 24 hour fever Similar to No persistent Chloroquine
knowlesi spikes P. malariae stage
*Recrudescence is a reoccurrence of symptoms from low levels of organisms remaining in red cells. Relapse is a return of clinical symptoms
from liver stages (hypnozoites).
**Treatment:
1. Suppressive (to avoid infection)
2. Therapeutic (eliminate erythrocytic)
3. Radical cure (eliminate hypnozoites)
4. Gametocidal (destruction of gametocytes)
Successful treatment is accomplished with chloroquine followed by primaquine. Chloroquine therapy is suppressive, therapeutic, and
gametocidal, whereas primaquine eliminates the exoerythrocytic form.
34
CHAPTER 6 | MEDICAL PARASITOLOGY
Hemoflagellates (Trypanosomes and Leishmanias)
Hemoflagellates infect blood and tissues.
Trypomastigote in blood smear
Figure II 6 2. Trypomastigote
Flagellar
pocket
Nucleus
Figure II 6 3. Amastigote
Figure II 6 3. Amastigote
Trypanosomes are found in human blood as trypomastigotes with flagellum and
undulating membrane and in tissue as amastigotes (oval cells having neither the
flagellum nor undulating membrane).
Leishmanias are always found as amastigotes inside macrophages.
34
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 6 7. Hemoflagellates
Vector/Form/
Species Disease Transmission Reservoirs Diagnosis Treatment
Trypanosoma • Acute: Chagas Reduviid bug • Cats, dogs, Blood films, Benznidazole
cruzi* disease (American (kissing or armadillos, trypomastigotes or nifurtimox
trypanosomiasis); cone bug; opossums
Mexico, South/ genus
• Poverty
Central America; Triatoma)
housing
swelling around passes
eye (Romaña sign); trypomastigote
myocarditis and (flagellated
meningoencephalitis form) in feces;
scratching
• Chronic: dilated
implants in
cardiomyopathy,
mucosa
megacolon,
achalasia
Trypanosoma African sleeping Trypomastigote Humans, • Trypomastigotes Acute: suramin
sickness in saliva of some wild in blood films, Chronic:
brucei
(African tsetse fly animals CSF melarsoprol
gambiense
trypanosomiasis) contaminates
Trypanosoma • High
Antigenic variation bite
b. rhod immunoglobulin
esiense levels in CSF
Leishmania Visceral leishmaniasis Sandfly bite Urban: Amastigotes in Stibogluconate
donovani** humans macrophages in sodium (from
complex Rural: rodents bone marrow, liver, CDC)
and wild spleen
animals
Leishmania Cutaneous Sandfly bite Urban: Amastigotes in Stibogluconate
(About 15 leishmaniasis humans macrophages in sodium
different (Oriental sore, etc.) Rural: rodents cutaneous lesions
species) and wild
animals
Leishmania Mucocutaneous Sandfly bite Urban: Same Stibogluconate
braziliensis leishmaniasis humans sodium
complex Rural: rodents
and wild
animals
*T. cruzi: An estimated 1/2 million Americans are infected, creating some risk of transfusion transmission in U.S. In babies, acute infections
often serious, involving CNS.
In older children and adults, mild acute infections but may become chronic with the risk of development of cardiomyopathy and heart failure.
**Leishmania all: Intracellular, sandfly vector, stibogluconate.
34
CHAPTER 6 | MEDICAL PARASITOLOGY
Miscellaneous Apicomplexa Infecting Blood or Tissues
Table II 6 8. Miscellaneous Apicomplexa Infecting Blood or Tissues
Disease/Locale of
Species Origin Transmission Diagnosis Treatment
Babesia Babesiosis Ixodes tick Giemsa stain of thin Clindamycin +
(hemolytic, Coinfections with smear or hamster quinine
malaria like) Borrelia inoculation; small
rings, maltese
Babesia microti, Same range as
cross, tetrad in red
WA1, & MO1 strains Lyme: NE, N
blood cells
Central, California,
and NW United
States
Toxoplasma gondii Cat (essential Serology Pyrimethamine +
definitive host); sulfadiazine
High IgM or rising
many other animals
IgM acute infection
(intermediate host)
Mode: raw meat in
U.S. (#1 is pork)
and contact with cat
feces
Toxoplasmosis
Diseases. In healthy individuals, Toxoplasma acquired after birth is often asymp
tomatic or a mild, nonspecific flu like illness with lymphadenopathy and fever
(heterophile negative mononucleosis). Once infected, as immunity develops,
bradyzoites encyst, but generally remain viable as evidenced by a positive antibody
titer.
Toxoplasma acquired as a primary infection during pregnancy often presents with
flu like illness/heterophile negative mononucleosis; the fetus may be infected.
• If Toxoplasma crosses placenta early, severe congenital infection
(intracerebral calcifications, chorioretinitis, hydro or microcephaly or
convulsions) may occur; if it crosses placenta later, infection may be
inapparent but may lead to progressive blindness in the child later in life
(teens)
• Maternal antibodies (secondary infection) protect the fetus during
pregnancy, even if mother is re exposed during pregnancy
In AIDS patients, Toxoplasma is the leading cause of focal CNS disease. A brain
scan will describe ring enhancing lesions. Unless prophylactic drugs are given,
AIDS patients who are seropositive for Toxoplasma will have reactivational
infections.
34
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Recall Question
Which of the following Plasmodium utilizes the hypnozoite form to
induce relapse?
A. Plasmodium falciparum
B. Plasmodium vivax
C. Plasmodium malariae
D. Plasmodium knowlesi
Answer: B
IMPORTANT METAZOAN PARASITES
Nematodes
The nematodes are the roundworms. They cause a variety of diseases (e.g.,
pinworms, whipworms, hookworms, trichinosis, threadworms, filariasis).
• Round unsegmented bodies
• Transmitted by:
– Ingestion of eggs (Enterobius, Ascaris, Trichuris) or meat containing
larvae (Trichinella)
– Direct invasion of skin by larval forms (Necator,
Ancylostoma, Strongyloides)
– Infection involving insects transmitting the larvae with bites
(Wuchereria, Loa loa, Mansonella, Onchocerca)
35
CHAPTER 6 | MEDICAL PARASITOLOGY
Table II 6 9. Round Worms (Nematodes) Transmitted by Eggs
Disease/Organs Form/
Species Most Affected Transmission Diagnosis Treatment
Enterobius Pinworm Large Eggs/person • Cellophane Pyrantel,
vermicularis intestine, to person tape prep of albendazole
Most frequent nocturnal Autoinfection perianal area Treat entire
helminthic perianal itching family
• Ova have
parasite in
flattened
U.S.
side with
larvae inside
Trichuris Whipworm Eggs Barrel shaped Albendazole
trichiura Cecum, Ingested eggs with
appendicitis, bipolar plugs in
and rectal stools
prolapse
Ascaris Ascariasis Eggs Bile stained, Supportive
lumbricoides Ingest egg → Ingested knobby eggs therapy
Most common larva migrate Adults 6–12" during
helminth thru lungs roundworms pneumonitis;
worldwide (cough) and surgery for
Largest mature in small ectopic
roundworm intestine; may migrations;
obstruct albendazole
intestine or
bile duct
Toxocara Visceral larva Eggs Clinical findings and serology Albendazole;
canis or cati migrans Ingested/ self limiting in
(dog/cat Larvae wander from handling most cases
ascarids) aimlessly until puppies or
they die, cause from eating
inflammation dirt in yard
(pica)
35
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 6 10. Roundworms (Nematodes) Transmitted By Larvae
Species Disease/Organs Form/Transmission Diagnosis Treatment
Necator Hookworm infection Filariform larva Fecal larvae (up to 13 mm) Albendazole
americanus Lung migration → penetrates intact and ova: oval, transparent and iron
New World pneumonitis skin of bare feet with 2–8 cell stage therapy
hookworm bloodsucking → visible inside
anemia Occult blood fecal may be
present
Ancylostoma Cutaneous larva Filariform larva Usually a presumptive Thiabendazole
braziliense migrans/intense skin penetrates intact diagnosis; exposure Topical
Ancylostoma itching skin but cannot corticosteroids
caninum mature in humans
(dog and cat
hookworms)
Strongyloides Threadworm Filariform larva Larvae in stool, serology Ivermectin
stercoralis strongyloidiasis: penetrates intact
Early: pneumonitis, skin
abdominal pain, Autoinfection leads
diarrhea to indefinite
Later: malabsorption, infections unless
ulcers, bloody stools treated
Trichinella Trichinosis: larvae Viable encysted Muscle biopsy; clinical Steroids for
spiralis encyst in muscle → larvae in meat are findings: fever, myalgia, severe
pain consumed; wild game splinter hemorrhages, symptoms and
meat (bear meat) eosinophilia albendazole
Table II 6 11. Filarial Nematodes
Species Disease Transmission/Vector Diagnosis Treatment
Wuchereria Elephantiasis; Mosquito Microfilariae in Surgery,
bancrofti; Brugia tropical pulmonary blood, eosinophilia ivermectin and
malayi eosinophilia diethylcarbamazine
Loa loa (African eye Pruritus, Calabar Chrysops mango Microfilariae in Surgical removal of
worm) swellings flies, deer flies blood, eosinophilia worms; ivermectin,
diethylcarbamazine
alternative
Onchocerca River blindness, Blackflies Skin snips from Surgical removal of
volvulus itchy “leopard” rash Calabar swellings worms; ivermectin,
diethylcarbamazine
alternative
Dracunculus Creeping eruptions, Drinking water with Increased IgE; worm Slow, cautious
medinensis (guinea ulcerations, rash infected copepods eruption from skin worm removal with
worm, fiery serpent) stick
35
CHAPTER 6 | MEDICAL PARASITOLOGY
Trematodes
Trematodes are commonly called flukes. The first intermediate hosts are snails.
• Leaf shaped worms, generally flat and fleshy
• Hermaphroditic (except for Schistosoma, which is either male or female)
• Have complicated life cycles occurring in 2 or more hosts
• Have operculated eggs (except for Schistosoma), which contaminate water,
perpetuating the life cycle; also used to diagnose infections
Table II 6 12. Trematode (Fluke) Diseases
Reservoir Progression in
Organism Common Name Host Acquisition Humans Important Ova Treatment
S. mansoni Intestinal Cats, Contact Skin penetration Praziquantel
Schistosoma schistosomiasis dogs, with water; (itching) →
japonicum cattle, etc. skin mature in veins
penetration of mesentery →
eggs cause
granulomas in
liver (liver
enlargement in
chronic cases)
Clay pipe stem
fibrosis of portal
vein
Schistosoma Vesicular Primates Contact Skin penetration Praziquantel
haematobium schistosomiasis with water; (itching) →
skin mature in
penetration bladder veins;
chronic infection
has high
association with
bladder
carcinoma in
Egypt and
Africa
(Continued )
35
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 6 12. Trematode (Fluke) Diseases (Cont’d)
Reservoir Progression in
Organism Common Name Host Acquisition Humans Important Ova Treatment
Nonhuman Swimmer's itch Birds Contact Penetrate skin, Trimeprazine
schistosomes (Great with water; producing Calamine
Lakes, skin dermatitis Sedatives
U.S.) penetration without further
development in
humans; itching
is most intense
at 2 to 3 days
Clonorchis Chinese liver Dogs, Raw fish Serum like Operculated Praziquantel
sinensis fluke cats, ingestion sickness eggs
humans
Fasciola Sheep liver fluke Sheep Watercress Hepatitis Operculated Praziquantel
hepatica eggs
Fasciolopsis Giant intestinal Pigs Water Diarrhea ± Operculated Praziquantel
buski fluke chestnuts malabsorption eggs
syndrome
Paragonimus Lung fluke Pigs/dogs Ingestion of TB like disease: Operculated Praziquantel
westermani* raw crab/ hemoptysis, eggs in
crayfish night sweats sputum
from Asia,
Africa,
South
America
*Paragonimus kellicotti causes similar disease from ingestion of raw crayfish in Midwest United States
Cestodes
The cestodes are the tapeworms. For the most part, they have complex life cycles
involving extraintestinal larval forms in intermediate hosts. When humans are the
intermediate host, these infections are more serious than the intestinal infections
with adult tapeworms.
• Have 3 parts: a head or scolex, a “neck” that produces the proglottids
(together, the neck and proglottids are called the strobila), and the
segments or proglottids that mature as they move away from the scolex
• Hermaphroditic, with each proglottid developing both male and female
reproductive organs, and mature eggs developing in the most distal
proglottids
• Adhere to the mucosa via the scolex, which is knobby looking and has
suckers or a sucking groove
• Have no gastrointestinal tract; instead, absorb nutrients from the host’s
gastrointestinal tract
• Diagnosed by finding eggs or proglottids in the feces
35
CHAPTER 6 | MEDICAL PARASITOLOGY
Gastrointestinal Cestodes (Tapeworms)
Table II 6 13. Gastrointestinal Cestodes (Tapeworms)
Disease/Organ
Involvement/
Cestode* Form/Transmission Humans Are Symptoms (Sx) Diagnosis Treatment
Taenia saginata Rare beef DH* Intestinal Proglottids or Praziquantel
(beef tapeworm) containing the tapeworm/ eggs in feces
IH: cattle cysticerci is small intestine
DH: humans ingested Sx: asymptomatic
or vague abdomi
nal pains
Taenia solium Water, IH* Cysticercosis/ Biopsy Praziquantel:
(pork tapeworm) vegetation, eggs → larva surgery in
IH: swine; food develop in brain, some sites
rarely: humans contaminated eye, heart, lung,
DH: humans; with eggs etc. Adult onset
developing and Slavic Autoinfection epilepsy (seizures)
countries
Rare/raw pork DH Intestinal Proglottids or Praziquantel
containing the tapeworm eggs
cysticerci is Sx: as for Taenia in feces
ingested by saginata
humans
Diphyllobothrium Drinking pond IH Sparganosis/ Biopsy Praziquantel
latum (fish tapeworm) water w/→ larvae penetrate
IH (2): crustaceans → copepods intestinal wall and
fish; rare: humans (crustaceans) encyst
DH: humans/mam carrying the
mals; cool lake larval forms or
regions frog/snake
poultices
Rare, raw pickled DH Intestinal tape Proglottids or Praziquantel
fish → containing worm (up to 10 eggs in feces
a sparganum meters)/small
intestine megalo
blastic anemia
Echinococcus Ingestion of eggs IH Hydatid cyst Imaging; serology Surgery;
granulosus disease/liver and albendazole
IH: herbivores; lung where cysts
rare: humans containing brood
DH: carnivores in capsules develop
sheep raising areas
Echinococcus Ingestion of eggs IH Alveolar hydatid Imaging; serology Surgical
multilocularis cyst disease resection
IH: rodents
DH: canines and cats;
northern areas
*Definitive host = adult tapeworm develops in; intermediate host = cysticerci or larvae develop in; cysticerci = encysted larvae found in
intermediate host. Common name is in parentheses.
35
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Recall Question
Which of the following nematodes is commonly transmitted by
autoinfection?
A. Ascaris lumbricoides
B. Ancylostoma braziliense
C. Enterobius vermicularis
D. Trichuris trichiura
Answer: C
35
Clinical Infectious Disease 7#
LEARNING OBJECTIVE
❏ Answer case based questions related to infectious disease
These charts are designed for self study after the organisms have been reviewed.
They represent the basics used in clinical scenarios on the exam.
Cover the last column on each chart and write the causal agent(s) on paper. Then
think about how the organism causes disease. Is there a major virulence factor?
SOME ABBREVIATIONS:
• → :progressing on to
• ~ : approximately
• HIV+ = confirmed human immunodeficiency virus infection; often used for those who are HIV+
but do not have full blown AIDS (i.e., CD4+ >200)
• CMI: cell mediated immunity
• CGD: chronic granulomatous disease
• IC: immunocompromised
• NF: normal flora
• PMNs: polymorphonuclear leukocytes
• subQ: subcutaneous
If there are multiple causal agents, at the end of the description there may be a
number listed with the abbreviation “CA.” This means you should be able to list
that number. If it specifically says “species,” you should give species.
35
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 7 1. Diseases of Skin, Mucous Membranes, and Underlying Tissues
Type Infection Case Vignette/Key Clues Common Causal Agents
Furuncles, Neck, face, axillae, buttocks Staphylococcus aureus
carbuncles
Inflamed follicles from neck down Pseudomonas aeruginosa (hot tub folliculitis)
Acne vulgaris Inflammation of follicles and sebaceous Propionibacterium acnes
glands
Impetigo Initially vesicular; skin erosion; honey crusted Streptococcus pyogenes
lesions; catalase negative organism
Initially vesicular but with longer lasting Staphylococcus aureus
bullae; catalase positive organism
Vesicular lesions Sometimes preceded by neurologic pain Herpes
SubQ granulomas/ Tropical fish enthusiasts; granulomatous Mycobacterium marinum (fish tank
ulcers/cellulitis lesion granuloma)
Cellulitis following contact with saltwater or Vibrio vulnificus
oysters
Mycetoma (swelling Solitary or lymphocutaneous lesions, rose Sporothrix schenckii (rose gardener
with pain, sinus gardeners or florists, sphagnum moss disease)
tract formation,
Subcutaneous swelling (extremities, shoul Bacteria: Actinomyces, Nocardia, Fungi:
yellow granules in
ders) multiple CA Madurella, Pseudallescheria, Sporothrix
exudate)
Jaw area, associated with carious teeth, Actinomyces israelii “lumpy jaw”
dental extraction, or trauma
Malignant pustule Pustule → dark red fluid filled, tumor like lesion Bacillus anthracis
→ necrosis → black eschar surrounded by red
margin
Ecthyma gangrenosum (as above) Pseudomonas septicemia
Cellulitis Blue green pus, grape like odor, burns Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Dermal pain, edema, heat and rapid spread. Streptococcus pyogenes (Erysipelas)
Red, raised butterfly facial rash
Hot inflamed tissues. Deeper tissues from Variety of bacteria: S. aureus, S. pyogenes,
extension of skin lesions or wounds includ gram (–) rods, Clostridium and anaerobes
ing surgical
Wounds Surgical wounds (clean) Staphylococcus aureus
Surgical wounds (dirty)—list groups S. aureus, Enterobacteriaceae, anaerobes
Trauma—list groups Clostridium, Enterobacteriaceae, Pseudomonas
Shallow puncture wound through tennis shoe Pseudomonas aeruginosa
sole
Animal bites Various Pasteurella multocida
Human bites, fist fights Eikenella corrodens
Dog bites Capnocytophaga canimorsus
Rat bites Streptobacillus moniliformis and Spirillum
minus
Cat scratches resulting in lymphadenopathy Bartonella hensela
with stellate granulomas
358
CHAPTER 7 | CLINICAL INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Table II 7 2. Ear, Nose, Throat, Upper Respiratory System Infections
Type Infection Case Vignette/Key Clues Common Causal Agents
Acute otitis media Red, bulging tympanic membrane, fever Streptococcus pneumoniae
102–103; pain goes away if drum
H. influenzae (often nontypeable,
ruptures or if ear tubes are patent. 5 CA
recurs)
Moraxella catarrhalis
RSV
Rhinovirus
Otitis externa Ear pain—list of organisms NF often involved
Often mixed infections:
Staph aureus (from NF)*
Candida albicans (from NF)*
Proteus (water organism)
Pseudomonas (water)
Malignant otitis Severe ear pain in diabetic; life threaten Pseudomonas aeruginosa
externa ing
Sinusitis Sinus pain; low grade fever As for acute otitis media
Oral cavitary disease Painful mouth—overgrowth of spiro Fusobacterium and treponemes
chetes and fusiform bacteria (normal oral spirochetes)
Sore mouth with thick white coating Candida
(painful red base under); increased risk:
premature infants, AIDS, IC pts, pts on
antibiotics, vitamin C deficiency
Sore throat Inflamed tonsils/pharynx, which may be Streptococcus pyogenes (group A
purulent and may develop abscesses; strep)Rash indicates presence of
cervical lymphadenopathy, fever, stom erythrogenic exotoxin A
ach upset; sandpaper rash
White papules with red base on poste Coxsackie A
rior palate and pharynx, fever
Throat looking like Strep with severe Epstein Barr virus
fatigue, lymphadenopathy, fever, rash;
heterophile (+); Downey type II cells
Low grade fever with a 1–2 day gradual Corynebacterium diphtheriae
onset of membranous nasopharyngitis (diphtheria)
and/or obstructive laryngotracheitis; bull
neck from lymphadenopathy; elevated
BUN; abnormal ECG; little change in
WBC (toxin). Exudate bleeds profusely
when dislodged
Common cold Rhinitis, sneezing, coughing; list CA with Rhinoviruses (summer–fall)
seasonal peaks
Coronaviruses (winter–spring)
Human metapneumovirus
Adenovirus, many others
35
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 7 3. Eye Infections
Type Infection Case Vignette/Key Clues Common Causal Agents
Eyelid Bilateral eyelid swelling, >10% Trichinella
eosinophilia, fever, muscle pain;
earlier GI Sx
Stye; 2 CA Staphylococcus aureus
Propionibacterium acnes
Unilateral inflammation at bite site Trypanosoma cruzi
often around eye or mouth; travel
to Mexico, Central or South
America
Conjunctivitis Red itchy eye(s)/pus; onset 2–5 Bacterial pink eye
neonate days
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Red itchy eye(s)/pus; onset 5–10
Chlamydia trachomatis (serotypes
days
D–K U.S.)
Neonate with “sticky eye” Staphylococcus aureus
Conjunctivitis (other Red itchy eye(s), thin exudate; Viral pink eye: adenovirus (more
age groups) pain, photophobia common than bacterial pink eye)
Red eye, pus; 4 CA S. aureus, group A Strep, Strep
pneumoniae (all gram [+])
Haemophilus influenzae, H. aegyptius
Red eye, pus, presence of inclu Chlamydia trachomatis
sion bodies in scrapings; CA with
serotypes D K (inclusion conjunctivi
serotypes in U.S.
tis)
Granulomas and inturned eye Chlamydia trachomatis
lashes, corneal scarring, blind
serotypes A, B, Ba, C (trachoma)
ness; CA with serotypes
Chorioretinitis Neonate or AIDS; 2 CA Toxoplasma, CMV
Retinopathy with Mom IV drug abuser Treponema pallidum (congenital
keratitis in baby syphilis)
36
CHAPTER 7 | CLINICAL INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Table II 7 4. Cardiac Symptoms
Type Infection Case Vignette/Key Clues Common Causal Agents
Acute endocarditis: Developing a heart murmur; IV Staphylococcus aureus
drug user
Chills, fever, arthralgia, myalgia,
back pain, acutely ill, Janeway
lesions; emboli
Not IV drug user Staphylococcus aureus
Subacute endocarditis: Poor oral hygiene or dental work Viridans streptococci (55% of
cases in native hearts)
Fever with vague symptoms
with insidious onset, fatigue,
weakness, weight loss, night
sweats, anorexia, myalgias;
murmur may have been long
present; emboli, splinter
hemorrhages
Gram neg. endocarditis (normal HACEK organisms
oral flora)
(Haemophilus aphrophilus
Actinobacillus actinomycetem
comitans
Cardiobacterium hominis
Eikenella corrodens
Kingella kingae)
Biliary or urinary tract infection Enterococcus faecalis
GU manipulation in elderly men
IV drug user Staph. epidermidis
Aspergillus (branching <45)
Candida (pseudohyphae)
Pseudomonas
Viridans streptococci
Dilated cardiomyopathy Rural South America Trypanosoma cruzi
36
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 7 5. Middle and Lower Respiratory System Infections
Type Infection Case Vignette/Key Clues Most Common Causal Agents
Respiratory difficulty or Inflamed epiglottis; patient often 2–3 and Haemophilus influenzae (epiglottitis)
obstruction unvaccinated
Infant with fever, sharp barking cough, Parainfluenza virus (Croup)
inspiratory stridor, hoarse phonation
Bronchitis RSV
Wheezy; infant or child ≤5 years
>5 years Haemophilus influenzae, Mycoplasma
pneumoniae, Chlamydophila pneumoniae
With cough >2 weeks, afebrile; >9 Bordetella pertussis
Pneumonia Poorly nourished, unvaccinated baby/child; Measles: malnourishment ↑ risk of
Typical: high fever, giant cell pneumonia with hemorrhagic rash pneumonia and blindness
productive cough,
Adults (including alcoholics) #1 CA Streptococcus pneumoniae
diffuse infiltrates
Rusty sputum, often follows influenza
Neutropenic pts, burn pts, CGD, CF Pseudomonas
Foul smelling sputum, aspiration possible Anaerobes, mixed infection (Bacteroides,
Fusobacterium, Peptococcus)
Alcoholic, abscess formation, aspiration, Klebsiella pneumoniae
facultative anaerobic, gram negative bacte
rium with huge capsule, currant jelly sputum
Nosocomial, ventilator, post influenza Staphylococcus aureus
Abscess formation
Gram +, catalase +, coagulase +
Salmon colored sputum
Atypical: low fever, dry Pneumonia teens/young adults; bad hacking Mycoplasma pneumoniae (most common
cough, diffuse infil cough; initially non productive cough cause of pneumonia in school age
trates children)
Atypical with air conditioning exposure Legionella spp.
especially >50 yr, heavy smoker, drinker
Atypical with bird exposure, hepatitis Chlamydophila psittaci
AIDS patients with staccato cough; “ground Pneumocystis jirovecii
glass” x ray; biopsy: honeycomb exudate with
silver staining cysts, progressive hypoxia
Acute respiratory Travel to Far East, winter, early spring, SARS CoV
distress hypoxia
Spring, 4 corners region, exposure to rodents Hantavirus
Acute pneumonia or Over 55, HIV+, or immigrant from developing Mycobacterium tuberculosis
chronic cough with country
weight loss, night
Dusty environment with bird or bat fecal Histoplasma capsulatum
sweats, calcifying
contamination (Missouri chicken farmers),
lesions
yeasts packed into phagocytic cells
Desert sand, SW U.S. Coccidioides immitis
Rotting contaminated wood, North and Blastomyces dermatitidi
South Carolina
362
CHAPTER 7 | CLINICAL INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Table II 7 6. Genitourinary Tract Infections
Type Infection Case Vignette/Key Clues Most Common Causal Agents
Urethritis Gram negative diplococci in PMNs in urethral Neisseria gonorrhoeae
exudate
Culture negative, inclusion bodies Chlamydia trachomatis
Urease positive, no cell wall Ureaplasma urealyticum
Flagellated protozoan with corkscrew motility Trichomonas vaginalis
Cystitis Frequent and painful urination, hematuria, and #1 E. coli, other gram negative enterics,
fever Pseudomonas, Proteus
Young, newly sexually active individual; gram Staphylococcus saprophyticus
positive cocci
Pyelonephritis As above, with flank pain and prominent fever E. coli, Staphylococcus
Cervicitis Friable, inflamed cervix with mucopurulent Neisseria gonorrhoeae (gram negative
discharge; probes or culture to distinguish diplococci)
Chlamydia trachomatis (non staining
obligate intracellular parasite)
Herpes simplex (virus)
Vaginal itching, Adherent yellowish discharge, pH >5, fishy (Bacterial vaginosis) overgrowth of Gard
pain, discharge amine odor in KOH, clue cells; gram negative nerella vaginalis and anaerobes
odor cells dominate
Vulvovaginitis, pruritis, erythema, discharge: Candida spp.
consistency of cottage cheese
Foamy, purulent discharge, many PMNs and Trichomonas vaginalis
motile trophozoites microscopically (corkscrew
motility)
Pelvic inflamma Adnexal tenderness, bleeding, deep dyspareu Neisseria gonorrhoeae or Chlamydia
tory disease nia, vaginal discharge, fever; tenderness from trachomatis or both or a variety of other
cervical movement, possibly palpable inflamma organisms
tory mass on bimanual exam, onset often
follows menses
Genital lesions Genital warts Human papilloma virus (most common
U.S. STD), Treponema pallidum, molluscum
contagiosum
Multiple painful vesicular, coalescing, recurring Herpes simplex virus
Nontender, indurated ulcer healing spontane Treponema pallidum
ously 2–10 weeks
Non indurated, painful papule, suppurative with Haemophilus ducreyi
adenopathy, slow to heal
Soft, painless ulcer, pt from Caribbean or New Klebsiella granulomatis (granuloma ingui
Guinea, gram negative intracellular bacilli nale)
Genital elephan Initial papule heals; lymph nodes enlarge and Chlamydia trachomatis L1–L3
tiasis develop fistulas; genital elephantiasis may
Wuchereria or Brugia (filarial nematodes)
develop, tropics, microfilariae in bloodstream
36
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Diarrhea
Dysentery
• Abdominal cramps, tenesmus, and pus and blood in the stool
• Usually associated with invasive bacterial disease in the colon
Diarrhea
• Refers to profuse watery feces
• Most commonly associated with increased secretion of fluid across the
mucosal surfaces of the small intestine in response to a toxin or a viral
infection
• No inflammatory cells, usually no fever
Table II 7 7. Diarrhea by Intoxication
Common
Most Common Age Group Incubation Duration of
Sources Infected Period Pathogenesis Symptoms Symptoms Organism
Ham, potato All 1–6 hours Heat stable abd cramps, <24 hours Staphylococ
salad, cream enterotoxin is vomiting, cus aureus
pastries produced in food diarrhea;
contaminated by sweating and
food handler; food headache may
sits at room occur; no fever
temperature
Rice All <6 hours Heat stable toxin As above 8–10 Bacillus
causes vomiting cereus: emetic
hours
form
Meat, vegeta All >6 hours Heat labile toxin Nausea, abd 20–36 hrs Bacillus cereus:
bles causes diarrhea cramps, diar diarrheal form
(similar to E. coli rhea
LT)
36
CHAPTER 7 | CLINICAL INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Rotaviruses Adenovirus Enterocpoalitho virus virus Clostrpiedrifurmingens cholerae parahae Enterotoxigen Enterochoelimor lamblia Crypt p o a s r p v o u br m iedlili, Cyclo M sp i o cr r o a, sporidi
molyticus
Organism E. Norwalk like coli E. Isospora
40/41 genic Vibrio Vibrio rhagic Giardia
Noro E.
um
ic
hours days
to
indefi
days weeks hours days weeks 3
of Symptomdasys days 10 days to in
Duration
8–12
12–48
<24 to 7–10 years
daysweeksAIDS:
5–7 1–3 3–4 3–5 1–2 nite
Up
4
vomiting; present along and immuinnocompe
and vomiting with fever fever) diarrhmeaa;labsorption diarrh s e p a ores/oocysts
watery diarrhaebadomvoinmailting, some watery
waterfyever, watery or diarrh b e e a sometimes (no
and
vomiting, and profusely fever may with crampbsl,ood greasy chronic
Noninflammatory fever, nausea, and rarely waterfyever stools) water h y eada n c a h u e s , ea, diarrhea severe in fast
dehydration some cramps and with pale, diarrh s e e a vere
Symptoms diarrhea, Diarrhea, W to ater d y iarrhea Diarrh in ea, diarrh v e o a m , itingProfu v s o e mit w in a g te ; r Explosive cramps, Water v y omiting Abdo d m ia in rr a h l ea Looseto, syndrome Acid stool
fever Abd (rice with fever. mild Mildtent;AIDS
in
disacctrhaanrsip b o u r i t ld diarrhea with enzymes invasion cholera; phospholipase adeny i l o a n te s bloody and surface
mono micro a v l i o l n li g ; and no invasive and duod i e n n te u s m tinal
cause pili microvilli virus small form, organism
blunte p d ro ; pr c ia o ; upl m ed ay watery through of seentissue b ; order cycla t s h e e i o n r flamm m ati i o m n ic d k y i s n e g nteryfor stimu w la a te te s r s to ta x b in le causes to epithelial
creating adjoining blunting in hemotleysstisns, of cytototxhien, the attach replicate
intest l i a n m e in g a lucoisnetolerance enterocytes v is acuoolfizati b o r n ush adeny c l A at M e P gastroenteritis efflux intestine; of in the
Diarrhea in down; influx to shows
infiltr
d
a
e
t
c
e
r
s
e
m
as
a
e
labsorption
in
rarer lysophosphol
(
i
L
p
T
as
)
e
i
;
n a
invasionexcyastnd
disk a to ttach and
small
infiltrate lactosoesmotic
to
damage
biopsy
stimuilnacteresawseithout severeen,terotoxinn;egativetoxinresult
s
i
m
ng
all
cyclase
w
is
hichno inges
m
te
u
d
l
;
tip
su
ly
cking intestine
Noninflammatory Pathogenoefsis activity Adherence cytop m la o sm no i t c n o uclear Enterotoxin limited labile with Sporozoites
Micro n v u i c ll l i ear norma a l n ; d causes Jejunal appeacrasusing cause i s ntestine i a s are cyclatshee guanylaVteerot d o i x a i r n r , hea jejun b u y m;
dase Toxin thereclear ness Heat Cysts the
Self and into villi
up of
?
hours hours hours hours hours
Causing winter, days weeks
Incubation days days days days
spring) 18–48 12–72
Period 8–24 9–72 5–92 5–25
1–3 (fall, 7–8 2–6 3–5 2–4
Organisms
beavers,
water, Mexican shellfish uncooked oral care, fecal
Diarrhea: Common nosocomial, Nosocomialwater, food, ships poultry, food, under
vegetables fecal
(hamburger) animals
care, oral oral oral oral and daycampientgc., care,
Microbial Most Sources Day fecal Food,fecal Water f , ecal Cruise Beef, gravie fo s od Wate f r, ecal R or aw cooked Water f , ruits Food, Water, dogs, Dayoral,
8. Group
and
toddlers
kids,
in
devel
c
o
o
p
u
in
n
g
tries
kidsadults
<10 Children, patients
7 Common InfectedInfants Infants all
T
II
able Age
Young Older
and
50%yrs., AIDS
IC All All All All All
365
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
gastroenteritis enterocolitica Enteroinvasive
jejuni
Salmonella Clostridium Entamoeba
histolytic
Campylo
Organism Shigella Yersinia
bacter difficile
coli
E.
by
normal
spontaresolution
antibireduce weeks fluid
months
mild; antibiotrteicat metrocnhidaange electrolyte metrofnoillowed
limiting days) weeks; replacement
of Symptom d s aysweek days; days;can 3 stopped; antibiotic to iodoquinol
Duration neous spread – 9 or Weekwsithdazole
day
1–2 <1 self 3–5 4–7 otics (avg. Until withzole 1–2 and
Rx
1
p m a a in l ,w di i a t r h fever b ab lo d od t y e ) n , de n wrn a /e u os s cs e c, a o in steo a m n y e e m li i t a is → a fi t rst crampasb,und th an e t (dysentery) (frequ & b ien l n o t o ly d a p b a d in o ; m n i o n n a i l nflammatory severe cramp s s y ; stemm an iuc d cus, c w r i a t m h p t s he d w i i a t r h rh s e o a metu o iml f ceesra p p t r e i o o ri d n to uce
diarrhaebadominalin
leukocytes to
in
abd enterimtisalaise, (occ abd and blood diarrhea gastroenteritis diarrhea fever, blood s , tools pus organism
SymptomDsiarrh
ai
e
s
a
e
,
;rhea, Diarrhceraamp f
a
e s
n
, v
d
er,
vomi
s
c ti
i
e n
c
l g
k
l ;
le Water l y ower
tenesm
p an u
u
d s
s
stools Fever, with stools a a ), lso Mild c
a
o
b
l
d
itiss;pikintgoxici p i t n y u ; s F
an
e
d
verb
an
lo
d
odstools G
ac
e
u
n
te
.
crampdiynsge;n
c
mt
o
ear
lo
yy
n
;
nitis any
that
pro the rare lymph appendici note
W in BC terminlaamlin P a MN which diarrheaintestine ultim m at u el c y os u a lcer septicem w ia ith cold; entero p li l k a e qu m e embrane) (troph w o i z t o h itpersodulceisniogns but
intestiinne; enterotoxin mesennteecrriocsis in response abscesses facilities,
resulting causing colon infected grow disease dysentery colon like water
Diarrhea/Dysentery and c in ells p to enetrate respon w s a e t , ery small diarrhea; mucosal from to insens o i c ti c v u e r. yellow (pseudo the wall flask throughcare
small epithe a R l n i B u d m C epithelial region and the an p th e e netr s a h te allo d w ysenter i iy l s e ; umthe focal distin a g b u l i e sh may inflam f m ria a b to le ry this Shigella surviv in e colon charac in te te ri s s t t i i n c al day
Inflammatory Pathogen M i t en h s e u is ltiipnlvyade in s flam st m oo a l t s io . n A to dsor s i b n m te a s ll t o iiln f eeo;ce r a P c e n G a s d l pon s c t s A i e m M u P lat S c e o s h l i o g n e p a fi l iz l t r r a e o st duc i w n in a d t g u e c ry eshdigel p l r a o e du a a c t n i i n d o g ns termine o an f llarg n p e o r m o d d e e u s n d t ; c t o i e f s fic o i u s r lt gan p h is r e m o a d t u t A c o e r x t s i h n r . itis Intensc t e h re e atec l s e o s l i o o n n i a w s c s i s t o h ciated S to imilar I c n y g st e s sa m tend u d ltip i o t n h l f y v e asion extra d sp is r e e a a s d e c o i s n a u u tb se r t s e h d e a i t s t k i s ng
pria The tis; die) the and diarrhea in
problem
hours weeks have
Causing Incubation days days days days commo t n hat products
a
Period 8–48 be
3–5 1–7 2–7 2–3 2–4 ones may
NA
most dairy
Organisms
are route
domes domes care, care, reservoirs,fecal with common the listed or
Common anima u ls n , pasmilk, animals, water, use clindamycin) water, water, gener are fecal milk
Associated
Diarrhea: care,oral day oral day animal wilddomestic oral antibiotic oral oral, listed organ o i r s a m l s unpasteurized
Sources*Poultry, teurized Poultry, animals tropical
Most tic water, day fecal tic water, fecal Water n , o oral Milk, fecal (most Food, fecal Food, fecal ally those b th y e
Microbial =
=
carespread
Infected adults mo older adults antibiot Water Day M = ilk
Age <1 and
7 9. Common esp and esp infants e 6 sp yr. esp and *Sources:
II Group young 10 young on Adults
Table All, year All, kids All, to All, kids Pt ics All
366
CHAPTER 7 | CLINICAL INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Table II 7 10. Other Gastrointestinal or Liver Infections
Signs and Symptoms Case Vignette/Key Clues Most Common Causal Agents
Hepatitis: Food borne (possibly contaminated Hepatitis A (“infectious” hepatitis)
Jaundice, anorexia, nausea, right raw oysters or clams); 14–45 days; (picornavirus)
upper quadrant pain on palpation, without chronicity; sturdy naked RNA
cigarettes taste foul, elevated liver virus
enzymes*
IV drug abuse, needle stick; chronic Hepatitis B (“serum” hepatitis)
carrier state, cirrhosis, primary neonatal transmission (Hepadnavi
hepatocellular carcinoma; DNA virus rus)
easily inactivated by alcohol
Transfusion, IV drug abuse, or Hepatitis C (Flavivirus)
prison acquired tattoos; acute
illness is less severe than hepatitis
B but chronicity is higher, with 60%
of those infected having chronic
active hepatitis; RNA, enveloped
virus
Enterically transmitted with high Hepatitis E (Hepevirus)
fatality in pregnant women, no
chronic form
Acute abdominal pain Intestinal blockage Ascaris lumbricoides or Diphylloboth
rium latum
Bile duct blockage Ascaris lumbricoides (following
surgery) Fasciola hepatica
Peritonitis Mixed flora often involving anaerobic
normal flora: Bacteroides fragilis and
facultative anaerobes such as E. coli
Cirrhosis Travel history: Puerto Rico, Peace Schistosoma mansoni
Corps, etc.; egg granulomas block
triads → fibrosis
IV drug use Hepatitis viruses
Pancreatitis Generally with swelling of salivary Mumps virus
glands
*Hepatitis may also occur with two other viruses: CMV and yellow fever virus or with toxoplasmosis or leptospirosis.
36
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 7 11. Changes in Blood Cells
Symptoms and Signs Case Vignette/Key Clues Most Common Causal Agents
Anemia Megaloblastic Diphyllobothrium latum
Normocytic Chronic infections
Microcytic and hypochromic (iron Ancylostoma, Necator, Trichuris
deficiency anemia)
Patient with cyclic or irregular fever, Often foreign travel to tropics, rings Plasmodium
decreased hemoglobin and or schizonts in RBCs
hematocrit
Splenectomized patient, New Multiple ring forms inside RBC Babesia microti
England, hemolytic anemia, no travel
history, summer months (tick
exposure)
Reduced CD4 cell count HIV
Increases in PMNs Generally found in many extracellu
lar bacterial infections
Increases in eosinophils Allergy
Helminths during migrations
Increases in mononuclear leuko Viruses and other intracellular
cytes (monocytes or lymphocytes) organisms: Listeria, Legionella,
Leishmania, Toxoplasma
Infectious mononucleosis Epstein Barr virus (EBV)
Heterophile (+)Downey type II cells
(reactive T cells) sore throat,
lymphadenopathy, young adult
Heterophile negative CMV
Toxoplasma
Listeria (Listeriosis)
Lymphocytosis with paroxysmal Unvaccinated child, hypoglycemic Bordetella pertussis
cough, stridor on inspiration
36
CHAPTER 7 | CLINICAL INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Table II 7 12. Central Nervous System Infections
Signs and Symptoms Case Vignette/Key Clues Most Common Causal Agents
Meningitis: Headache, Neonate to 2 months Streptococcus agalactiae #1 (gram positive
fever, vomiting, sepsis, coccus)
seizures, irritability, lethargy,
E. coli (gram negative rod)
bulging fontanelles, nuchal
More rarely: Listeria monocytogenes (motile
rigidity
gram positive rod)
3 months to 2 years; unvaccinated Haemophilus influenzae type B* (gram nega
child tive pleomorphic rod with polyribitol capsule)
3 mo to young adult. Prodrome Neisseria meningitidis
may be very rapid; child may be
(gram negative diplococcus with capsule;
properly vaccinated; rash
ferments maltose)
<2 yrs Streptococcus pneumoniae (gram positive
coccus, catalase negative, alpha hemolytic,
Young adults to elderly
inhibited by optochin, lysed by bile
Renal transplant patient Cryptococcus neoformans (#1); encapsulated,
urease (+) yeast Listeria monocytogenes
(motile gram positive rod)
Several month prodrome (except in Fungal, e.g., Cryptococcal, or if in Southwest
severely compromised). Usually ern U.S., Coccidioides
some underlying condition, endem
If near U.S. great river beds with exposure to
ic area
bird, bat feces; Histoplasma capsulatum
Patient with low CMI, nerve palsies Mycobacterium tuberculosis
in a patient with tuberculosis and
(Tuberculous meningitis)
low CSF glucose
Meningoencephalitis: Swimming and often diving in very Naegleria
warm waters (hot springs). Prefron
tal headache, high fever, distur
bance of smell
Immunocompromised patients Acanthamoeba or Toxoplasma
*By 1990, with day care centers and the dramatic increase in Haemophilus meningitis, Haemophilus meningitis became overall the most common.
Since late 1990, when the conjugated vaccine went into use, there has been a dramatic decrease in Haemophilus meningitis in vaccinated kids.
(Continued )
36
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 7 12. Central Nervous System Infections (Cont’d )
Signs and Symptoms Case Vignette/Key Clues Most Common Causal Agents
Encephalitis: Headache Summer–fall, mosquito borne from Encephalitis with arboviruses:
and fever → drowsiness, bird reservoirs (except for Califor
Western equine encephalitis (Midwest and
coma, hemiplegia, cranial nia encephalitis, which is a rodent
West U.S.)
nerve palsy, hallucinations, reservoir)
St. Louis encephalitis
behavioral disturbances,
and other focal neurological older Black adults with hypertension, most
findings severe infections
West Nile Virus (North America)
California encephalitis (entire U.S.)
Eastern equine encephalitis
all age groups, but most common in young
and old; highest morbidity of viral CNS
infections; with mental retardation, seizures,
personality changes in survivors
Focal uptake of radionucleotide, Herpes simplex encephalitis
RBCs in CSF, high opening pressure,
frontal temporal lobe involvement.
Mass lesion Generally following: Don’t do lumbar puncture; CT generally
sinus, ear, or dental infection, shows ring enhancing lesion; 45% mixed
infection at distant site, head infections; Streptococci and Bacteroides
trauma, etc. (symptoms dependent are the two most commonly identified
on location of mass) and elevated groups of bacteria
intracranial pressure along with
headache, mental changes,
nausea, vomiting, fever with chills,
and seizure
Reye syndrome Child following a viral illness with Influenza or varicella infection (Reye
pernicious vomiting, lethargy and syndrome)
irritability, which may lead to brain
swelling, indication of aspirin
usage.
Epilepsy Mexico, immigrant, onset after Taenia solium (neurocysticercosis)
age 20
Bell palsy (acute facial Systemic disease following bull’s Borrelia burgdorferi
nerve paralysis) eye rash
Guillain Barré (acute With GI tract problems Campylobacter jejuni
inflammatory demyelinating
With respiratory problems Influenza
polyneuropathy with ascend
ing paralysis)
37
CHAPTER 7 | CLINICAL INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Table II 7 13. Cerebrospinal Fluid Finding in Meningitis
CSF Cell Count
Pressure Appearance (cells/mm)3 Dominant Cell Type Glucose mg/dL Protein mg/dL Condition
<100 mm Clear 0–5 Lymphocytes 40–70 <40 Normal
H2O
Normal or + Clear 0–500 Early: PMNs Normal or - Normal or + Viral infection
Late: lymphocytes
++ Opaque 1–60,000 PMNs - ++ Bacterial
infection
+ Clear 10–500 Early: PMNs - + to ++ Fungal
Late: lymphocytes infection
- Below normal range, + above normal range
Table II 7 14. Selected Rashes
Type Rash Progression Other Symptoms Disease Causal Agent/Toxin
Erythematous Trunk and neck → extrem Sore throat, fever, nausea Scarlet fever Strep. pyogenes
maculopapular ities
Exotoxin A C
rash (sandpaper
like rash)
Diffuse erythema Trunk and neck → extrem Acute onset, fever >38.8 C Toxic shock Staph. aureus
tous, macular, ities with desquamation (102.0 F), myalgia, pharyn syndrome
TSST 1
sunburn like rash on palms and soles gitis, vomiting, diarrhea;
hypotension leading to
multi organ failure
Perioral erythe Trunk and neck → extrem Abscess or some site of Staphylococcal Staph. aureus
ma, bullae, ities, except tongue and infection skin disease:
Exfoliatin
vesicles, desqua palate; large bullae and scalded skin
mation vesicles precede defolia disease &
tion scarlatina
Petechiae → Trunk → extremities; Fever, rash, headache, Epidemic typhus Rickettsia prowa
purpura spares palms, soles, and myalgias, and respiratory zekii
face symptoms
Ankles and wrists → Fever, rash, headache, Rocky Mountain Rickettsia rickettsii
generalized with palms myalgias, and respiratory spotted fever
and soles symptoms (most common
on East Coast)
Generalized Abrupt onset, fever, chills, Early meningo N. meningitidis
malaise, prostration, coccemia Endotoxin
exanthem → shock
Skin: maculopap Generalized involving the Fever, lymphadenopathy, Secondary Trep. pallidum
ular; mucous palms and soles, bronze malaise, sore throat, syphilis
Endotoxin
membrane: or copper colored splenomegaly, headache,
condyloma arthralgias
Confluent ery Head → entire body Cough coryza, conjunctivi Measles Rubeola virus
thematous tis, and fever (prodrome),
Rash from T cell
maculopapular oral lesions (Koplik spots),
destruction of
rash exanthem, bronchopneumo
virus infected
nia, and ear infections
cells in capillaries
Erythematous Outward from site of tick Fever, headaches, myalgias, Lyme disease Borrelia burgdor
concentric rings bite Bell’s palsy feri
(bull’s eye)
37
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 7 15. Osteomyelitis
Type Infection Case Vignette/Key Clues Most Common Causal Agents
Fever, bone pain with erythema Adults, children, and infants without major Staphylococcus aureus
and swelling, some patients trauma or special conditions
(diabetic particularly) may have
associated cellulitis
Neonates (<1 mo) Staphylococcus aureus
Group B Streptococcus, Gram
negative rods (E. coli, Klebsiella,
Proteus, Pseudomonas)
Sickle cell anemia* Salmonella
Trauma Pseudomonas
*Sickle cell anemia patients are functionally asplenic and may have defective opsonic and alternate complement pathway activities. The most
common bacterial infections include
• Encapsulated organisms
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Haemophilus influenzae
Neisseria meningitidis
Salmonella enterica subsp.
• Osteomyelitis due to Salmonella enterica subsp.
• Pneumonia, bacteremia, and meningitis are all a problem.
Table II 7 16. Arthritis Related to Infections
Type Infection Case Vignette/Key Clues Most Common Causal Agents
Pain, redness, low grade fever, #1 overall except in the 15–40 age Staphylococcus aureus
tenderness, swelling, reduced group where gonococcal is more
joint mobility prevalent
Multiple joints From septicemia, e.g., staphylo
cocci, gonococci
15–40 years; mono or polyarticular Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Prosthetic joint Coagulase negative staphylococci
Viral Rubella, hepatitis B, and parvovirus
Chronic onset, monoarticular M. tuberculosis or fungal
Large joint resembling Reiter follow Borrelia burgdorferi
ing tick bite or erythema migrans
Postinfectious (reactive arthritis) Following gastrointestinal infection Salmonella, Shigella, Campylo
bacter, or Yersinia enterocolitica
Following sexual contact Chlamydia trachomatis
37
CHAPTER 7 | CLINICAL INFECTIOUS DISEASE
pyogenes*
Adenovirus
burgdorferi
Corynebacteriumfever)
Bacteria
Streptococcus DS
diphtheriae**
(rheumatic
Borrelia
myocarditis.
DNA
Myocarditis
SS B19 and
Virus
toxin
endocarditis
RNA
the
B
Coxsackie
of
effects
Trypanosoma
both
Parasite undersystemic
cruzi
pyogenes*
Carditis listed
streptococci
G+C to
fever)
due
Streptococcus is
it
Subacute (rheumatic carditis,
so
Viridans
pancarditis,
infection,
HACEK
G–R
as
local
Staphylococcus classified
(MCC)
Endocarditis
+ a
Coagulase is
aureus
diphtheriae
be
also
G+C Staphylococcus
can
epidermidis **Corynebacterium
– fever
Acute Pseudomonas *Rheumatic
aeruginosa
G–R
373
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Pseudomonas
aeruginosa
Lactose coli
G–R
+ ~27%)
Escherichia
(MCC
Bacteria Indole
+
Staphylococcus
Nosocomial G+C + epidermidis pneumoniae
–
Catalase
albicans
Klebsiella
Yeast
Candida Enterococcus
Infection –
coli
>90%)
Tract Escherichia
+
(MCC
Urinary
Indole
+
pneumoniae
Lactose
–
G–R
acquired Klebsiella
sp.
– Proteus
Community
Staphylococcus
saprophyticus
G+C
374
CHAPTER 7 | CLINICAL INFECTIOUS DISEASE
(<5%L)CMV)
Arboviruses
(California,
Mumps
RNA
VEE)
echo)
Viruses WEE,
B,
(<5%E)EE,
and
Picornaviruses
+
Aseptic ( A coxs A ac r k b i o e vWirNusVe,s neoformans
patients)
(SLE,
Cryptococcus
Borrelia, AIDS
(MCC
Bacteria Yeast
Meningitis (Treponema,
Spirochetes
Leptospira)
transplant/cancer)
monocytogenes
Gram+Rods
Child/Adult
(MCC)
Listeria
(MCC
agalactiae
b
Gram+Cocci Gram–Rods influe k n i z d a s e )
Septic
Streptococcus unvaccinated
Haemophilus
(MCC
coli
Gram–Rod
Escherichia meningitidis
Gram–Cocci
kids/adults)
pneumoniae
Neonatal monocytogenes aureus)
Neisseria
vaccinated
Gram+Cocci Staphylococcus
Streptococcus
Gram+Rod
Listeria
(MCC
375
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
gondii
patients
Parasite
Toxoplasma
(AIDS
Chronic
virus
(SSPE)
-RNA
Mumps
Encephalitis
(neonates)
(MCC)
DNA
1 2
HSV HSV
LCMV)
Acute
Arboviruses
– (California,
RNA
arboviral
+
MCCVEE)
ArboviWruNseVsWEE,
(SLE,EEE,
376
CHAPTER 7 | CLINICAL INFECTIOUS DISEASE
foods)
Clostridium Clostrpideriufrmingens
botulinum
(canned
Intoxication
O2
Bacteria
fast + Staphylococcecruesus
(MCC)
Cryptaocsipdoridium
Watery
rice)
AIDS, Bacillus
aureus
– (fried
oocysts
MCC
Malabsorption
Protozoa
Giardia
–
Curved Gram–Vibrios
fast
+
Acid hyponatremia)
Gastroenteritis Adenovirus
DNA Cystoisospora pneumophila
+
Infection
(+pneumonia,
adults
Viral +RNA Norovirus Legionella
MCC ETEC
Rods
segmented
histolytica Infants/Kids
Lactose–Rotavirus
–RNA,
MCC
DS,
–,–Parasite Gram+ monocytogenes
Entamoeba
Shigella
difficile
sp
Motile
Clostr(iadniauemrobe)
Salmonella Listeria
S+,
Bloody
H2
+,+ sp
EHEC
Rods
–
Lactose+
Sorbitol
Bacteria
F)
Campbyalcotbearicatler EIEC
(107.6 +
Gram–Curved
C
MCC,
42.0
377
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Pneumocystis
AIDS)
pneumoniae
Fungi jirovecii
(MCC pneumoniae
trachomatis
–
Chlamydophila
Mycoplasma
Chlam(nyedoinaates
Culturable
Bacterial
Atypical
Nombre
Influenza
– Measles
pneumophila
tularensis
Sin
RNA
BCYE
LegioFnrealnlacisella
+ SARS
Viral
Pneumonia
Adenovirus
DNA
VZV Escherichia
coli
+
Indole
pneumoniae
+ Klebsiella
Lactose
–
Pseudomonas pestis
aeruginosa Anaer(oasbpeisration)
– Yersinia
Gram
– (CF)
Typical
Streptococcus
pneumoniae
(MCC)
–
Catalase
+
Staphylococcus
Gram
+
aureus
378
CHAPTER 7 | CLINICAL INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Rhinovirus
common
Mycopplnaesmumaoniae
Bacteria +
most
are
–
RNA viruses
Retro HIV
Viruses +
listed
Naked Adenovirus
Pharyngitis* above
DNA
Enveloped
Exudate
The
pharyngitis.
CMV
Candida gonorrhoeae
of
Yeast
cause
Neisseria common
–
Gram Streptococcus
+
pyogenes
most
Bacteria
Cocci exam
the
the
are
+
Gram for
general,
relevant
Corynebacterium
Rods
in
diphtheriae
Viruses
EBV *Virusems,ost
and
379

Comparative Microbiology 8
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Differentiate infectious organisms that have clinically relevant and
distinctive morphology, physiology, pathogenicity, epidemiology,
transmission, pathology, lab diagnosis, treatment, or prevention
MORPHOLOGY/TAXONOMY
Spore Forming Bacteria (Have Calcium Dipicolinate)
Bacillus
Clostridium
Non motile Gram Positive Rods
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Nocardia
Clostridium perfringens (rest of the pathogenic Clostridia are motile)
Bacillus anthracis (most other Bacillus species are motile)
Acid Fast Organisms
Mycobacterium
Nocardia (partially acid fast)
Cryptosporidium oocysts
Cystoisospora oocysts
Bacteria and Fungi That Characteristically Have Capsules
The “biggies” can be remembered by the mnemonic: Some Killers Have Pretty
Nice Capsules!
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Haemophilus influenzae
Pseudomonas aeruginosa—slime producer especially in cystic fibrosis patients’
lungs
Neisseria meningitidis
Cryptococcus neoformans (only encapsulated fungal pathogen)
Bordetella pertussis
381
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Other Important Capsule Producers
E. coli meningeal strains have capsule, mostly K1
Bacillus anthracis—poly D glutamate capsule
Salmonella enterica subsp. typhi—(virulence; Vi) capsular antigen
Streptococcus pyogenes when first isolated; non immunogenic (but anti phagocytic)
hyaluronic acid capsule
Biofilm Producers
Staphylococcus epidermidis (catheter related infections)
Streptococcus mutans (dental plaque)
Staphylococcus aureus
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Pigment Production
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (blue green)—pyocyanin, fluorescein
Serratia—red pigment
Staphylococcus aureus—yellow pigment
Corynebacterium diphtheriae—black to gray
Unique Morphology/Staining
Metachromatic staining—Corynebacterium
Lancet shaped diplococci—Pneumococcus
Kidney bean shaped diplococci—Neisseriae
Bipolar staining—Yersinia pestis, Pasteurella multocida
Gulls wings—Campylobacter
Table II 8 1. Viral Cytopathogenesis
Inclusion Bodies Virus
Intracytoplasmic (Negri bodies) Rabies
Intracytoplasmic acidophilic (Guarnieri) Poxviruses
Intranuclear (Owl eye) Cytomegalovirus
Intranuclear (Cowdry) Herpes simplex virus
Subacute sclerosing panenceph
alitis (measles) virus
Syncytia formation Virus
Herpes viruses
Varicella zoster
Paramyxoviruses (measles,
mumps, rubella and respiratory
syncytial virus)
HIV
38
CHAPTER 8 | COMPARATIVE MICROBIOLOGY
DETERMINANTS OF PATHOGENICITY
Genetics
Genes encoding pathogenic factors reside on:
• The bacterial chromosome
Endotoxin
• A plasmid
Most toxins and multiple drug resistances
• A bacteriophage genome stably integrated into the host DNA as a
prophage. Virulence modified by the stable presence of phage DNA in
bacterial cell = lysogenic conversion.
For example, COBEDS mnemonic (when 2 people share a bed, somebody gets a
little pregnant [with phage]):
• C: cholera toxin
• O: Salmonella O antigen
• B: Botulinum toxin (phage CEβ and DEβ)
• E: Erythrogenic toxin of Streptococcus pyogenes
• D: Diphtheria toxin (Corynephage β)
• S: Shiga toxin
Antigenic variation
Neisseria gonorrhoeae (pili)
Borrelia recurrentis
Trypanosoma brucei
HIV
Invasive factors
Table II 8 2. Invasive Factors
Invasive Factor Function Bacteria
All capsules Antiphagocytic See earlier list with morphology
Slime layer Antiphagocytic Pseudomonas
(capsule or
glycocalyx)
M protein Antiphagocytic Group A Streptococci
A protein Inhibits opsonization Staph. aureus
Lipoteichoic acid Attachment to host All gram positive bacteria
cells
N. gonorrhoeae pili Antiphagocytic N. gonorrhoeae
38
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Table II 8 3. Extracellular Enzymes
Enzyme Function Bacteria
Hyaluronidase Hydrolysis of ground Group A Streptococci
substance
Collagenase Hydrolysis of collagen Clostridium perfringens
Prevotella melaninogenica
Kinases Hydrolysis of fibrin Streptococcus
Staphylococcus
Lecithinase (alpha Damage to mem Clostridium perfringens
toxin) brane
Heparinase May contribute to Bacteroides fragilis
thrombophlebitis Prevotella melaninogenica
IgA Proteases Colonizing factor Neisseria
Haemophilus
Strep. pneumoniae
Ability to Survive and Grow in Host Cell
Obligate Intracellular Parasites
Cannot be cultured on inert media. Virulence is due to the ability to survive and
grow intracellularly where the organism is protected from many B cell host
defenses.
• Bacteria
All Rickettsiae
All Chlamydiaceae
Mycobacterium leprae
• Viruses
All are obligate intracellular parasites.
• Protozoa
Plasmodium
Toxoplasma gondii
Babesia
Leishmania
Trypanosoma cruzi (amastigotes in cardiac muscle)
• Fungi
None
38
CHAPTER 8 | COMPARATIVE MICROBIOLOGY
Facultative intracellular parasites of humans
• Bacteria
Francisella tularensis
Listeria monocytogenes
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Brucella species
Non tuberculous mycobacteria
Salmonella enterica subsp. typhi
Legionella pneumophila
Yersinia pestis
Nocardia species
• Fungi
Histoplasma capsulatum
Obligate Parasites That Are Not Intracellular
(e.g., cannot be cultured on inert media but are found extracellularly in the body)
• Treponema pallidum
• Pneumocystis jirovecii
EPIDEMIOLOGY/TRANSMISSION
Bacteria That Have Humans as the Only Known Reservoir
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
M. leprae (armadillos in Texas)
Shigella species
Salmonella enterica subspecies typhi
Rickettsia prowazekii (epidemic typhus)
Group A β hemolytic Streptococcus
Neisseria meningitidis and N. gonorrhoeae
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Treponema pallidum
Chlamydia trachomatis
38
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Zoonotic Organisms
(Diseases of animals transmissible to humans)
Bacillus anthracis
Salmonella enterica all subspecies except typhi
Leptospira
Borrelia
Listeria monocytogenes
Brucella species
Francisella tularensis
Pasteurella multocida (cat bites)
Vibrio parahaemolyticus (from fish)
Capnocytophaga canimorsus (dog bites)
Bartonella henselae (cat scratches)
Streptobacillus moniliformis (rat bite fever)
Mycobacterium marinum (fish tank granuloma)
Vibrio vulnificus (oysters)
Yersinia pestis, Y. enterocolitica, Y. pseudotuberculosis
Campylobacter fetus, C. jejuni
Most Rickettsia
Chlamydophila psittaci (birds)
Rabies virus
Arthropod Vectors in Human Disease: Insects
• Lice
Epidemic or louse borne typhus (Pediculus h. humanus)
Epidemic relapsing fever
Trench fever
• True bugs
Chagas disease (American trypanosomiasis)—kissing bugs
(Reduviidae)
• Mosquitoes
Malaria (Anopheles mosquito)
Dengue (Aedes)
Mosquito borne encephalitides: WEE, EEE, VEE, SLE, WNV
Yellow Fever (Aedes)
Filariasis
• Sandflies
Leishmaniasis
Bartonellosis
38
CHAPTER 8 | COMPARATIVE MICROBIOLOGY
• Midges
Filariasis
• Blackflies
Onchocerciasis
• Deerflies (Chrysops) and horse flies
Loiasis
Tularemia
• Tsetse flies
African trypanosomiasis
• Fleas
Plague
Endemic typhus
Arthropod Vectors That Are Not Insects
• Ticks
Rocky Mountain spotted fever (Dermacentor)
Colorado tick fever (Dermacentor)
Lyme disease (Ixodes)
Ehrlichia (Ixodes, Amblyomma)
Babesiosis (Ixodes)
Tularemia (Dermacentor)
Recurrent fever or tick borne relapsing fever (Ornithodoros, a
soft tick)
• Mites
Scrub typhus (Leptotrombidium) (transovarial transmission in vector)
Rickettsialpox
Parasitic Infections Transmitted by Ova
• Enterobius vermicularis (pinworm)
• Ascaris lumbricoides (roundworm)
• Toxocara canis (visceral larva migrans)
• Trichuris trichiura (whipworm)
• Echinococcus granulosus/multilocularis
• Taenia solium (cysticercosis)
All others are transmitted in larval stage.
38
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Bacterial and Fungal Infections That Are Not Considered
Contagious
(i.e., no human to human transmission)
Nontuberculous mycobacterial infections, e.g., Mycobacterium avium
intracellulare
Non spore forming anaerobes
Legionella pneumophila
All fungal infections except the dermatophytes
Infections That Cross the Placenta
(Mnemonic: TORCH)
Toxoplasma
Other (Syphilis)
Rubella
CMV
Herpes and HIV
<5% perinatal hepatitis B could possibly have been acquired by crossing placenta.
• Viruses
Cytomegalovirus
Rubella
HSV 2 (in primary infection)
Coxsackie B
Polio
HIV
B19
• Parasites
Toxoplasma gondii
• Bacteria
Treponema pallidum
Listeria monocytogenes
Spread by Respiratory Droplet
Streptococcus pyogenes (Group A)
Streptococcus pneumoniae Influenza
Neisseria meningitidis Rubella
Mycobacterium tuberculosis Measles
Bordetella pertussis Chickenpox
Haemophilus influenzae Pneumocystis jirovecii
Corynebacterium diphtheriae
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
38
CHAPTER 8 | COMPARATIVE MICROBIOLOGY
Spread by Inhalation of Organisms from the Environment
Histoplasma
Coccidioides
Blastomyces
Nontuberculous mycobacteria, e.g., M. avium intracellulare (MAC)
Legionella
Chlamydophila psittaci
Pseudomonas (also spread by ingestion and contact)
PATHOLOGY
Organisms that Produce Granulomas (most are intracellular, others
have persistent antigen)
Fran Likes My Pal Bruce And His Blasted Cockerspaniel (in) Salt Lake City.
(Mnemonic by M. Free.)
(ic) = intracellular organism
Francisella (ic)
Listeria (ic)
Mycobacterium (ic)
Treponema pallidum
Brucella (ic)
Actinomyces
Histoplasma (ic)
Blastomyces
Coccidioides
Schistosoma species
Lymphogranuloma venereum (ic)
Cat scratch fever
Infections Causing Intracerebral Calcifications
Toxoplasma
CMV
Cysticercosis
Cryptococcus neoformans
Tuberculous meningitis
38
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS
Special Stains
• Silver stains
Dieterle—Legionella
Gomori methenamine—Pneumocystis, fungi
• Acid fast (Ziehl Neelsen or Kinyoun)
• Mycobacterium, Nocardia(partially AF), Cryptosporidium, Isospora,
Cyclospora, and Microsporidia (oocysts in feces)
• India ink—Cryptococcus (if negative not a reliable diagnostic method)
• Calcofluor white—fungi
• Giemsa
Blood protozoa (Plasmodium, Babesia, Trypanosoma, Leishmania)
Histoplasma capsulatum in RES cells
Name Tests
Tests Disease
PPD or Tuberculin (Mantoux) TB
Lepromin Leprosy
Fungal skin tests Clinically valuable only to demonstrate
exposure or anergy
CAMP test Strept agalactiae carriers
Elek test Toxin producing C. diphtheriae strains
Weil Felix Rickettsia (with Proteus strain OX antigens)
Unusual Growth Requirements
Haemophilus (most species require one or both)
• X factor = protoporphyrin IX, the precursor of hemin
• V factor = NAD (nicotinamide dinucleotide) or NADP
Mycoplasma
• Cholesterol
Salt (halophilic organisms)
• Staph aureus will grow on high salt media.
• Group D enterococci will grow on 6.5% NaCl.
• Vibrio species requires NaCl to grow and grows at 6.5%.
Cysteine requirement for growth
• Four Sisters Ella of the Cysteine Chapel (mnemonic by M. Free)
• Francisella, Legionella, Brucella, and Pasteurella
39
CHAPTER 8 | COMPARATIVE MICROBIOLOGY
Cultures that must be observed for a long time
• Mycobacterium tuberculosis and all non tuberculous mycobacteria except
rapid growers
• Mycoplasma pneumoniae
• Systemic fungal pathogens (Blastomyces, Histoplasma, and Coccidioides in U.S.)
TREATMENT/PREVENTION
Treat Prophylactically
• Neisseria meningitidis (household and day care contacts—vaccination also
used in outbreaks)
• Mycobacterium tuberculosis with a recent skin test conversion or known
household (i.e., significant) exposure; or persons under 35 with a positive
skin test who have never been treated
• Haemophilus influenzae B (unvaccinated household contacts <6 years
old)—also vaccinate
• Neisseria gonorrhoeae (sexual contacts)
• Treponema pallidum (sexual contacts)
• Yersinia pestis
• Neonatal eyes (Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Chlamydia trachomatis, Treponema
pallidum)
Vaccines Available in the United States
Inactivated vaccines (RIP A; Rest In Peace Always)
• Rabies
• Influenza virus
• Salk polio (killed)—all primary vaccinations in U.S., including IC patients
• Hepatitis A
• Japanese encephalitis and several other encephalitis vaccines
• Vibrio cholerae
Live, attenuated vaccines
• Francisella tularensis
• Measles (rubeola)
• Rubella
• Mumps (killed vaccine available for IC patients)
• Sabin polio (oral)
• Smallpox
• Yellow fever
• Varicella Zoster
• Rotavirus
39
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Live, Pathogenic Virus (in enteric coated capsules)
• Adenovirus
Toxoid: Chemically Modified Toxin—Vaccines
• Tetanus
• Diphtheria
• Pertussis toxoid (in DTaP)
Subunit Vaccines
• Haemophilus—purified capsular polysaccharide conjugated to protein
• Neisseria meningitidis—capsular polysaccharides, pediatric version is
conjugated to protein
• Pneumococcal—capsular polysaccharide (7 and 23 serotypes) (pediatric version
is conjugated to protein)
Recombinant Vaccines
• Hepatitis B—HBsAg (produced in yeast)
• Human papilloma virus vaccine, 4 capsid proteins
39
Appendix
I
Reference Charts and Tables
39
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
gonorrhoeae bovis
Hemolysis
HEMOLYTIC
–
S.
D in NaCI
Group Growth
sp fermentation NO
N. 6.5%
MALTOSE
GAMMA
Neisseria
Usually
faecalis
–
+
meningitidis
E.
+ agalactiae
sp
B
STAIN N. Streptococcus Group
Hemolysis
R
COCCI
– HEMOLYTIC S.
GRAM
BACITRACIN
(clear)
pyogenes
sp BETA
sp Complete
A
Staphylococcus
Streptococcus CATALASE saprophyticus Group
S
+ S.
R
NOVOBIOCIN
group
S.
sanguismutans
–
sp epidermidis Hemolysis
Viridians
Staphylococcus HEMOLYTIC R
COAGULASE
S. S.
OPTOCHIN
+ S
(green)
pneumoniae
S.
aureus ALPHA
+ Partial
S
S.
S.
394
APPENDIX I | REFERENCE CHARTS AND TABLES
MorVaxeeilll Eloai n
k
e
e
l
n
la
ella
Kingell
maltose
Also
• • • • gonorrhoeae medium Tetracycline enterococcal
carbboihleydrate
Lactamase Mar C tin eftriaxo C ne hlamyd fe ia rment G D roup bovis Hydrwoiltyhz c e o s mplex
capsule vaccine esculin
ThayerPLUS not S. Non black
Probe DOC: for Does C
N. No Pili No • • •
β
• • • • • • • •
shaped testing
–
Gram
sp black prese
g
n
l
t
ucoseagarCO2
infecetinodnoi s ncafxrdnistis
Neisser K biea i a d n n C (+ e a y ) taO ( l + axs ) ei , d p a r s o e te E a n s d e o U to ti x l i i a n z e e rob C i h c o a C j l ca l o y a rl, n a d te le G D rou f p aecalis Ente c r a o r c b o H bo c ih y l c ey d u d r sw o ra i l t y t h e z c e o s m t p o l l e e x r i c a n o n l t on, tract Oppo S r e t n u s n i i t s iv ti i c ty
IgA escul b in lack Normal Bilia o ry p DOC:
• • • • • • • • E. Salt gutUTI Post
C
capsule
• • • • • • • • • •
meningitid(irsare) syndv.accine
maltose
PolysacchariUdeRT
Friderichsen•DcceeOffotCrtiaa:xxiomnee,
Lactamase Waterhouse
Tetravalent
Colonizes Ferments hemolysin)
hippurate with
N. • • β • Pili • • • • G B roup agalactia T (+ e e ) st (inco c m ar p b H l o e h y te y d d rtoo ra lley te rz C v ae a n o s g t lo in 1 n a 5 iz – e 2 s p t 0 r r e %e a g t men n in e g o i n t m ( i a ↓ s t e i a n n l g A + in ) m gi p t a i i s cmililninoglycoside
CAMP Scre ↓ en for DOC:
sp S. C Salt in ab. #1
• • • • • • • •
Streptococcus
COCCI + A)
Gram (SPE
saprophyticus GN
C ) oag h u em las os e ley ( xtui a ca d ll o y le N res o sci v esn o tat b sn io t cin G A roup pyogene C o s f aps h a u c y l i e a d lu p r r o o n te S O i i ct n repS S ttorelyp S st t oi r nl e y pH s t i yo n akli E t un o r r a x o y s i n t e n h R f i e d r h v o a e e g s uS ar e e c mt n r u i ea t c p e t C ic ellIumlitpie P G st e i / g n V o icillin
in active Post DOC:
NonUTI S. M
S.
• • • • • • • • • • • •
• • • •
hygiene)
in
endocarditis group work
sp epidermidis adherenc g e ut pros i t n h f e e t c ic t s i e o n n s s itive sanguimsutans caries endodceanrtda d ilt e is ntp + aelni a c m ill i i n n oglycosides
+ Gram Staphylococcus C ) oag h u em las o “ e l P y ( l t a i N i sc s n k toi i c n r”m , n m oa o sl u e S t , h u , bad u cr s uu e t r geC s ath d e e t v er ic , N e ovobiocin Virida S n . s S. Dex A tra d n h s e d : r e e n n t c aN i e n lorm or a o l p S h u ar b y a n c x ute (Post o p r oor DOC:
Non IV
S. • • • •
• • • • • • •
conjugated
enterotoxins yr amoxicillin
S au . reus C (+ o ) ag P A u ro la te s β L ( e i m n ac a t n B h a y e m e ) m t a a o H s s t e l a e y b a ti t l C t h c ee e A s m t M o S to l P a y l l e s t r M s a i a n a g nl a a tt n r Y p n i e i g t l o m lo l N i n se w n kn o o / it s g n r e m o T S s , y l o h a d n x o l d i c S S s c k y c k n a in d ld A e b d sc F p ( h 2 e o ) o – s i o s s 6 d e o A e s n n c i d u n o t g I d u e c V r s a u e rd r g A o s itsi c ts u eo D M N te m O a S f y C S c M Ve i A : l l ai l R : t i ni n c S s V q o A u R m i : n S y u A c p i : r n istin S pn . eumoni L s a h a e a n p c e C e d t aps Q ( u + u l ) e e I p ll g r u A o n t g e L b ba y i y lse s e e N i U d n o R r T m # f p > o 1 n 6 a r e 0 l u # f a m o d 1 r o u n lt m ia en # O m in 1 t e g i d t i i i k t i s n i a i s ds D M O ac C c r e o : f l t i r d ~ P r i ee a 2 e ss x n 0 ,i o s % n t V f e . o e l a d r , c e c ( s r i 2 l e n y r 3 e ot V pye a pd c ei c ( s sa i 7 e )t n r r e i o c t p t o y r p o e te s in)
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
395
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Clindamycin
hemolysis
perfrin s g p e o n r s elecithP C ihnoasspeh=oli f p e a rm se entation G ± debridement
Subterminal Enterotox z i o n neagar colonpoiso g n a i n n g g M re y n o em ne o c r r t o P a s l e i i n t s y icillin
Motile yolkin
StorDmoyuble Normal PLUS
anatomica e l xudatesfemale C. Alpha Egg Food Gas High DOC:
tractjaw)infections drainag Non
• • • • • • • • • • • •
tract abscess
branching
by boun " idn g a r r a ie n ssi u n l u es s m
a
"
n
o
d
ut
g
h
eni(tlouumripnyary
plus pseudome (C m l b in ra d n a o m u y s cin)
associated
Anaeroibsircaelii restricted from Cervicofabcriaailn Penicillin or
withmotile in Mycetoma difficile plaques Chanangteibiotic
A. RodsNonNot Sulfur
Normal
IUD
Solitary
Rx:
Anaerobic Noso
D
toc
i
o
a
m
rrh
ia
e
l
a colit A is ntib u i s o a t g ic eYelloCwoloT A +
B
noxinDsOCst:op
• • • • • • • • • • C.
• • • • • • •
bronchopulmonary poisoning hyperimmune
abscesses release
FORMING
(gran
S
u
u
le
lf
s
o
)
namides
botulinum paralysisantitoxinPenicillin drugs
asteroid F t r o oe il ds a s m(+e)nts a fa c s id t brain Mycetoma Motile Neu h l r a o e b t a o i t l x e B A in l C o h c F ks laccC fo iad o n d nTerdiva D a l n e O t n i C t t P o : L xi U n I b S n o f t a u n l h i t s u m ms n ae o nrum,
UreaPsaertiCalalyviMtauryltiple
C.
SPORE DOC:
• • • • • •
RODS N. FORMING
• • • • • • •
Motile para h ly y s p i e sPriemnmicsiuplnlaiensmolytic
epithelium Tetanospasmin
NON tetanispores GABA vaccine
(+) 2)
GRAM Non Char e a E ct F eNrse"rves, medi c u o m loniespseudom p e a m ls b y r P a L n U e ESrythromycin SPORE C. TermEixnoatloxinInhibGitlsyc T in e e tan S u p s as D ti O c C g : lobu P li L n U , TSoxoid
diphtheriae of on nerve
R granuLloeesffler's
shaped (AD H P eart, black larng A l ntitoxinvaccine • • • • •
Aerobic Myocarditis
C.
Club "ChinEexsoetoxin Volutin Tellu E t r e i L s te t E : KGray Recr D nt OC: Toxoid
anthrac g is lutamate (an
cycla
u
9 se
l
5
c
) %
er
edemdiasease
C
or
iprofloxacin
• • • • • • • • • • • Motile Ag facto fa r cto a r denyslkaitneeschalorcaWloolPsnoertuemr'sondiaoxycycline
cells Protective
capsule
Edema Painless
monocytogenes organism IC
Non
B. P
D
oly
Spor
R
Ees
Toxin:
Lethal
Black
Striking
DOC:
transplant
for In
cell
andGentamicin • • • • • • • • •
Motile moti c tlo e it l y l intrac h e e l m lu o elan ly rr t i i c c hmenptlacenta Neo C na a t n a c lA er mpicillin Aerobic h)
Renal
exotoxin: (2–18
Tum f b ro li m ng Meningitis
"Jets" Seps C is rosses DOC: cAMtPoxin: poisRonxing
FacBetaCold cereus Symptomatic
L. • • • • • • • • • Motile stabl v e omiitnincrgelaasbeildeiarrrhiecae
Heat Heat FriedFood
B.
• • • • •
396
APPENDIX I | REFERENCE CHARTS AND TABLES
doxycyclin
CSF
Aminoglycoside myocarditis
pyove c r o d l i o n n p iz o a p tiodnrug infections patiengtasngrenosum uremilaeptos P i p n M iro N sis
Anaerobes aeruginosa 2 normal sp micro w sc a o te p r y leptospirosis or
Facultative S la l y im er G l o e i d k r o e ap r e E A x : oto A R o e x E f D in F PLiver O (+ x ) ida P s i e gm p e y n o ts cy T a r n a i n n s , 1 o ie0 f n%t O in steo a m bu y s e e P ilni r n t s i e s um c fi y b o s r n t o i i c a s N is oso B p c a o u t m r ie n i n a N t l s eutr E o c p t e h n y D Pi m ce O n a C ic : P il L li U n S Leptosp f i i r e a ld Cont A uarm n in i i m ne j a a a t l u e n d d i i c c t e e , ric M - No enin u ra g v s i e h t i i t s is, diseas R fea e il n u a r l P G e,enicillin
In Dark Fever N , on IcteriWceil DOC:
P.
• • • • • • • • • • •
• • • • • •
pneumophila
) azithromycin
( pacificus
Fe stainGrampneumonia Erythromycin
condi&tionin c g harcoal confusion
loving CYS silverpoorly contagious SPIROCHETES Rxn deer
agar Herxheimersp I. mice, migrans lousevariation
RequiBreusffered Dieterle Atypical Diarrhea scapularis), lesions fever or
L. Wate a r ir Yeast Stains Mental DOC N : ot Walle S d hapeFdilaments BorreliaMicr s o t a a e in ro b p u h r i g li d cd o is rf e e a r s i e ReserCvoAirs E : rythema recurr R e e n l t a is p b s o in d g y Antig P e e n n i i c cillin
Target
• • • • • • • • • • Jarisch Giemsa Lyme WI, Vector:
AEROBES Thin
SpiralAxial (I. CT, DOC:
SPIROCHETES B. B.
RODS TX • • • • • • • • •
bite trans. MO,
rxn vaccinSetreptomycin
tularensis tick rodenGtsranuAlRom,atous
CYS Transovarian
G ( ) RAM cells Requ D ire e s rmacen A to e r rosRoalbbits, T - ular a e t m tn i t a d infectious malfo te rm sts ecdardio(ilmipminunofluorescence)
F. I R
E
n
Live,DOC:
sp chancre, CNS
Screening Penicillin
& • • • • • • • • • Syphilis stillbirths,with microscopy
Treponemaparasite infectCioVuSs,
Benzathine
xrxn
B sp rucella cells C C Y O S 2 ,U m n il p k afsetevuerridziesdea f s e e ver mild s c u h p ro p n u m i r c a e t l i i v te e n , sis acuter a i n fa d m d p o in xycycline p - allidOubmlig P a A te IN R L a E s S h S Gumm C a o s n , g V & R - en P D i R t R a R a -l L b : eagi A n BSs te p s e t cif D fiice a l r d kDOC:
E EndoRtoexqiunires Undu B la a n n t gMalt a a bortu c s attle s , uis pigs goats severe D , OC: • T. • 1 ̊ • 2 ̊ • 3 ̊ • • • • FTA • •
R
In B. B. B.
• • • • • • • • • vagina w/
Cefoxitin
(cancer) melaninog(ecnoimcambiincerdodentium)
flora
txn A OR
pertussis via and cyclase toxinX, GNBP agar agar Eryth a ro n m d ycin ANAERO s B p ES capsu c l o e l s on o ic roph f a a r c y t n o x rs , : perito p n n it e i u s monia Metronidazole
cell hematgogxliuntininedema) Derm L an ip e i c d roticGengou cough toxoid hemagglutinin Bacteroiodbelsigate traumdaisease oropharynx OR
B. A to dhesion pertus A si d s en ( y lo la c t a e l T to r x a i c n heal E - ndot A R o o f D xi P n BordR L et o eg w a e W n hoo D p O in C g : Vacci f n i e lamentous f - ragil M L is P o S d , i P fi r e e d do N i m n o i r n m aPn a rt l edi s s u p r o g s e i cr n yh g ,ron S ic epticaesmpiiraa P ,ti r o e n vo H te u ll m a F a u n sob T a r c e t p e o r V a n inu i e n gm m c in e a T m a n r t o e u n t c h h Clindamycin
DOC:
• • • • • • • • • • B.
• • • • • • • • •
397
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Capnocytophaga (Sylvatic) h)
Actin C o a b r a d c io il b lu a s cteriu appearance Amin(o7g2lycosides
Gardnerella Quarantine
pestis stainsitnagin) plague enterocoltiotixcians
U.S.plagubeuboes,
(+)antigens conjunctivitis growth
Also: Coagulaspein Ways r o o n d ’ e s nts Southwest Pneumonic stable
• • • • fluoroquinolones Producing Y. V&W Safet ( y bipolar WildF bi l t e e a Bubo f n ev ic er, DOC P : LUS Cold Heat
and Y.
+ • • • • • • • • • • •
amoxicillin Motile
(+) U.S. H2S electrolytes
sp
Campy s l p obacter shape C d atal C a O se 2 + diarrheaGITErythromycin, Non
Helicob M ac ic te r f r o l a a e g r eS o ll p a hil ( i + c ), agar ureas u e lc (+ er ) s omep c r l a a z ri o th le rom en y t c e i r n b o a c c o t l e i Wr ti i s ainl e g s s c ” apes Fermenting Non S sp higellaantigens SU diarr a h n e d a Azithro
C or ommOaxidSakseirIrnovwa’ssp i y v l e ori gastr c it a i r s c , inoma jejuni fetus Shiga 6 t 0 o S xin Neu C ro y to to xE t i o nn x t i e n rEontotexrioncol f i l t u is idFQ,
Polar ̊C, DOC: ̊C “Gull DOC: InvasiveNicks Bloody
H. 37 C. 42 #1 C. H DOC:
No
• • • • • • • • • • • •
cephalosporins
• • • • • •
Lactose
fluoroquinolones
shaped tolerant Oysters subsp. factors ag) sickle subsp. cells cephasluobssppo.rins Symptomatic
ANAEROBES V sp ibrio f c l o a m ge E ( m C l n l a a h t , e o r A R i c l n o e A , D c t r o M a r P e x g C ( O ( a P i e + + n s a n x ) ) e t ) i , a d A c ( l a T a u s l s l C k e e tu a B C c O l r i S he nl 1 a o ) es l B E T C e s r i o l i h c a o r o , t l y w s e p t r o a a e t o e s e l : s d r s e e v h e y f & e r d l e l u r e a i c d t t i t f c r o e o o o n t r l n r y a t t a c p e c y s a t c r s a li C ( ) sh n , aa a e le t t a m l R s a o e a s a l e w y fo t v i o c u d u ln s B w • ifi r a c a t u c e s C S k r i e es p lhl t D t u i e c l t O i e r t m a i C s c , i : y a cline Non and Producing Salmo e n n e te ll r a ica • A V O H i n , , ti • E ge M ns B : • P / r M ed a i H g pc s C a H p i s g o o t h rs G n ii k cn a e g s y tr • W t ( H e eO s c i , t t d o a • O i m l n syte c do e ims ll eyae • S e sl n . ei t t e is t r y ic p a hiN a re n o s i . ma H p l r 2 o S d I ( Eu n R )c v e a d s R s i p v o o e s t e s • DOC o : r • S en . te e ri n c t a er P r i e t o i p d u t i i l s l t R e ry x s , : • D f in o O v r a C s a i m ve p : icillin,
Polar RiceMost
Rx:
V. V. Motile
FACULTATIVE • • • • • • • • • • •
Fluoroquinolones
ENTEROBACTERIACEAE H2S (+)
(NAD) Cefotaxime/Ceftriaxone
and B Rifampin (+) Nitrites sp. motilUitryea S se eptcicaelcmuilai
V
nasophartyynpxe pneumonia Catalase
influenz c a a e psule (Hemin), conjkuindcst:iyvra vaccine, GlucoseN to itrates Proteus Swar(m+)i,ng Staghorn
PolyQ ( r + iub ) eitlo p lul ro n t g e R X as e e quinires P in atho M i 1 n g – e e 2 n n i i m n c g ed it i e i a s p , iglottiti H s IB FermO ( ) e , nxtidRaesdeuce • • Indol • U e TI, • • DOC:
Normal
H. OtitiAscutDeOCP:rev:
IgA disease
• • • • • • • • • • •
- - -
pneumoniae
septum Ceph+a/l–oasmpoinrionglycoside
Catheterization
Lymphadenitis jellylung Nosocomial
RODS
dogs) (+)
Pneumonia
AlcoAhsopliisramtion
QuellungCurraCnhtronic
Amoxicillin/Clav Fermenting Capsule
& DOC:
(–) multocida (cats UTI
Gram CYS biteswith (prophylaxis) K. • • • • •
Other RequiresCellulitis
Animal sorbitol
DOC:
P. Lactose infec (K tio 1 n ) D s rha 0157 c : o H li 7 tiSs EAF microvilli
• • • • meningitis uremfiecrment
Adhesins Traveler's coded Fimbriae/biofilmor Cephalosporins
colon STInvasiveHemorrhagic AmpSiucliflloinnamides
VTEC
coli NosocomialLT, Hem
n
o
o
ly
t
tic in
E. N in orm f U o a T r l I p X ili, Neon E • a T ta E l C Toxi E • ns IE : CE • HEC Does EPEC Plasm E i A d EC DAE I C nfan B t a s cte D r O ia C:
#1 P
• • • • • • • • • • •
398
APPENDIX I | REFERENCE CHARTS AND TABLES
and extra M ce y ll c .) o sterols+pur/py C ri e m p i ha d za i il n toh e s s rpo : omriynucsrienalyticum tetracyclin
p
→
eptidogl
m
yc
e
a
m nybor.uth
medi
H
a:
ayflick's cases
WALL
Mycoplasmas 65%
in (culturable, or
pneumonia s e tain ( i i n r n e g q'dp)neumonia speci o a r l coloninies erythromycin,prostatitis erythromycin
CELL Eaton's agglu n t o in r ins Ureaplasm p a ositive
wall adults growth, Penicillins
cell GramCholesterol living plasma,mulberry Urethritis w , all
NO Lacknon Atypyicoauln F g reeSlow media Cold DOC: Ureacseell DOC: stain.
M. No No
• • • • • • • • • • • • Gram
atherosclerosis with
pneumoniae
reliably
peptidoglycan trachomatis acid incluiosidoinne) STDcomm co o n n j ) unct, America →
blindanzeistshromycin
tetracyclin p e sittaci
bactebruiat mura t m ra i n c s i m nt i r t a te c cd e u l l l t u u l r a e r bacterial urethritis venereum conju → nctivitis up
Organisms* Chlamydiaceae intrac e e n l v lu e l l l a o a c r p k e body tissue c b o y nf G ir i m em ed sa, comm H m S o o n r V e i 2 nclu p s n . eu in m f o er ; 3 tility LymA S p . hsoiag,B C raan,uloma entro sc p a io rr n i c i n n a f g u e s c e tD o i r oouxsycyc C li h n l e amydopinhfielac c ti o o m na w s m s i s o t o h n c m aina a dt c io ro n lide C s hlam p y n d e o u p m hi o la ni t a etracycline n sh o o t w
A m T o P d , . Chla O m b y l d ig i G na a e r t g a e a ms p ti t o v a o e in rl E y l ; em R b e o e n d t t i y a c s o r u e y r l r a o t l e g o r g o y wb ( A F toh b l d , ie S D K s erot U My . po S es . s ( a t H nd PV Neon n a e t o a n l c P / a a e I t d r D av u l , i. l S L 2 c t , ei 1 tr , ios,types S i A n T fr D ic S A B a e , , , rotT f y o rp l a l ec ic sh c sc o o a m n r j r c a . i o n r g n , eLaeladi D n O g C: T ag W en A R t R esp P v ir e r a o r t y b o Pa r o y btleyn D ti O al C: Atyp B ( i p c i a a rd r l r sD ot O s) C: negative—do
Dx:
Gram
NO • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
Staining
Felix Borrelia)—all
soles
Weil
fleas,
Gram
bactebruiat
r
o
a
n
sh
palms, rode
A
+nt
b
s bacteria
squirrel henselae
AIDS
+ and
monocytePsMNs
envelope tick Fl. in
Fevertrunk, wildindir louse angiomatosis Leptospira,
Poorly ATP Rickettsias ricket i t n s t i r i ac n e e l g lu at l i a v r e Spt’d w → rist D s/ e a r n m k ti l a c e c k s e si n ,n t c o r r Doxycyclin p e rowaz in ek tr i a i c t e y l p lu h P l u a e s r dic h u u l m us a s n q s u , irrels Barton f e e l v la er WBC doxy c c h y a c ff l m e in e a e n c s r p - i o s h p a h g a o g c e y s tophila
SOME poorly 4x
MT Rese s r e v r o o i l r : s: Epidemic Reservoir: scratch EhrlicEhhiarliicnhiosis tick (Treponema,
Obligate Obligate Bacillary Morulae
GramstainRocky Vector: DOC: Vector: flying DOC: Ixodes
Dx: Cat
R. R. E. E.
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
spirochetes
ethambutol
migr p at h i o o s n phor ̊C, intracsetlaluinlare bacterium CMI) the
FAST Mycobacte tu ri b a erc b d u u o l t e o s s n w C is ’ W a t xy o ae b r l o ig bt a rea te ns c m on is t s at i rg o ei n hoau i W ls n o h s B i e b C r o . e x s i p d i p . . n / h h a i g b f o . u s s o i m o c ( a 3 n + a t e7 t ) alase resis J m t e a e n n d s c i e ei + r +u s n if m o a n m ip ( m t a hp 2 yz o ei ir nn d ) a r ( m z i 4 i f n o a a ) m m p i i d n e b d u o t esn C ’ W t aerobe n co o n n ta d ing is fioe s cu A p ts t i I s o D n S s intrac ( d e C a l m l M ul (a l I e p a g p o r e r o) o r d + r + s i a y f p am so p n i e n marin l u e m sio g n r s anu i r s i l f o o a n m m ia a p z ) i i n d , , L an e d gionella
ACID ( w + a ) ll d to ue fast, Resp P ir a a th to o fra g yc e t n o ,m r yco m la it t o eS c u h l . faltyisdoess(o+m),e 6 ̊C 8 growing Lowenstein i + soniazid avium ( w + a ) ll t w o axy fastObli o g r a g t a e n O is p m po P → r u tu lm n p lia o s t t s n te, , aryleprae Oblig T a u te be L r e c p u r l o o m id atcoluosfazimine Cuta t n a e n o k us n th o a t t e
Gramstain Acid Cord Niac ( ain – t ) SlowDrug DOC: GramdueAcid Soil CA DOC: (fishDOC: *Also
M. M. M. M.
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •
399
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Hemolysis
HEMOLYTIC
–
in NaC
fermentation D
MALTOSE Group Growth
NO 6.5%
– GAMMA
Usually
+
STAIN
COCCI
–
R
GRAM Hemolysis
HEMOLYTIC
BACITRACIN
(clear)
CATALASE
BETA
Complete
+ R
NOVOBIOCIN
S
–
Hemolysis R
COAGULASE HEMOLYTIC
S
OPTOCHIN
+
(green)
ALPHA
Partial
+
S
400
APPENDIX I | REFERENCE CHARTS AND TABLES
gonorrhoeae
bovis
Group
S.
N.
sp
Neisseria
faecalis
D
Group
S.
meningitidis
agalactiae
B
N. Group
S.
sp
COCCI Streptococcus
saprophyticus pyogenes
A
Group
S.
S.
group
sp
sanguimsutans
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Viridans
S. S.
S.
pneumoniae
aureus
S.
S.
401
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Motil
Non
Anaerobic
Anaerobic
FORMING
Motile
SPORE
RODS
FORMING
Motile
NON
(+)
GRAM Non SPORE
Aerobic
Motile
Non
Aerobic
Motile
Motile
402
APPENDIX I | REFERENCE CHARTS AND TABLES
Anaerobes
Facultative
SPIROCHETES
SPIROCHETES
RODS
AEROBES
)
(
GRAM
&
ANAEROBE
403
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Producin
and
Motile
H2S
Non
Non
Fermenting
Lactose
ANAEROBES Non
Producing
and
Motile
FACULTATIVE ENTEROBACTERIACEAE
H2S
RODS
Fermenting
(–)
Gram
Other
Lactose
404
APPENDIX I | REFERENCE CHARTS AND TABLES
WAL
CELL
NO
peptidoglycan
Organisms*
mod.
ATP,
NO
Staining
Gram
Poorly
ATP
SOME
FAST
ACID
405
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
STRANDED
NEGATIVE
AMBISENSEENVELOPED ARENAVIRVUirSus ChoriomBeUniNnYgiAtiVsIRUSVirus ICOSAHEDRA
HELICAL (SegmentLedy)mphocytic (SegmEVented) Hantavirus PARVOVIRUS
Fever CalifCorrnoisase
NAKED
B19
AND Lassa
La
SINGLE
PARAMYXOVIRUS ORTHOMYXOVIRUS
SENSE metapneumovirus
RHABDOVStIoRmUaStitis
ENVELOPED FILOVIRUS B
HELICAL
VirusVirus Parainfluenza Virus
Marburg
(Segm
A
&ented)
ADENOVIRUS
NEGATIVE MumMpseasRleSsV Rabie V s esicular Ebola Influenza LINEAR Adenoviruses
Human
STRANDED ICOSAHEDRAL
ICOSAHCEADLRIACLIVIRUS
NAKED Agen li t ke HEPE H E V e I p R a U tit S is PICO V R i N ru A s Enter E o c v h i o r C A & B u v s o i e r x u s s s R ac h k in ieA V ov ir i u ru s ses NAKED CIRCUL P A A R PIL V L ir O us M P es O AV LY I V R O i U r M u S s A e V s IRUS
VIRUSES NorwNaolkro Polio Hepatitis VIRUSES
SINGLE
PapillomaPolyoma
STRANDED
SENSE
RNA CORONAVIRUS DNA
POSITIVE POXVIRUS
HELICAL CoronCaovVirus COMPLEX Contagiosum
Molluscum
DOUBLE VarioVlaaccinia
SARS
ENVELOPED
ICOSAHEDRAL
FLAVIVViIrRusUS EVEV RETROVIRUS ENVELOPED HERP V E ir S u V sV I i R ru U s S
Feve D V r i e r n u g s L E uo V euis H C epatiti T s OGA R V V i u r b I u R e s E l U l q a SuiEnequin V E e V enezuelan HIV HTLV LINEAR SimpZleoxste B V r i a r r u r s Cyto v 6 m ir e u g s a v 8 l i o r v u i s rus
WestEeranstern
Yellow WNV ICOSAHEDRAL VaricEelplastein HerpeHserpes
STRANDED St. Herpes
ICOSAHEDRAL
HEPADNAVIRUS
REOVIRUS tick virus
NAKED CIRCULARVirus
ReovRiroutsaCviorulosrado
DOUBLE fever
B
Hepatitis
406
APPENDIX I | REFERENCE CHARTS AND TABLES
NEGATIVE STRANDED
AMBISENSE ENVELOPED
ICOSAHEDRA
HELICAL
NAKED
AND
SINGLE
SENSE
ENVELOPED
HELICAL
NEGATIVE
LINEAR
STRANDED ICOSAHEDRAL ICOSAHEDRAL
NAKED
NAKED
CIRCULAR
VIRUSES VIRUSES
SINGLE
SENSE STRANDED
RNA
DNA
POSITIVE
HELICAL COMPLEX
DOUBLE
ENVELOPED
ICOSAHEDRAL
ENVELOPED
LINEAR
ICOSAHEDRAL
STRANDED
ICOSAHEDRAL
NAKED CIRCULAR
DOUBLE
407
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Bacterial Envelope (All the Concentric Surface Layers of the Bacterial Cell)
Envelope Structure Gram + or − Chemical Composition Function
Capsule (Non essential) Both Polysaccharide gel* Pathogenicity factor protecting
= Slime layer against phagocytosis until
= Glycocalyx opsonized; immunogenic**
Outer membrane Gram - only Phospholipid/proteins: Hydrophobic membrane:
Lipopolysaccharide LPS = endotoxin
Lipid A Lipid A = toxic moiety
Polysaccharide PS = immunogenic portion
Outer membrane proteins Attachment, virulence, etc.
Protein porins Passive transport
Cell wall Gram + (thick) Peptidoglycan open 3 D Rigid support, cell shape, and
net of: protection from osmotic damage
= peptidoglycan Gram - (thin)
N acetyl glucosamine Synthesis inhibited by penicillins
N acetyl muramic acid and cephalosporins
amino acids (DAP) Confers Gram reaction
Gram + only Teichoic acids*** Immunogenic, induces TNF alpha,
IL 1
Attachment
Acid fast only Mycolic acids Acid fastness
Resistance to drying and chemicals
Periplasmic space Gram - only “Storage space” between Enzymes to break down large
the inner and outer molecules, (β lactamases)
membranes Aids regulation of osmolarity
Cytoplasmic membrane Gram + Phospholipid bilayer with Hydrophobic cell “sack”
= inner membrane many embedded proteins Selective permeability and active
Gram -
= cell membrane transport
= plasma membrane Carrier for enzymes for:
Oxidative metabolism
Phosphorylation
Phospholipid synthesis
DNA replication
Peptidoglycan cross linkage
Penicillin binding proteins (PBPs)
Definition of abbreviation: DAP, diaminopimelic acid.
*Except Bacillus anthracis, which is a polypeptide of poly D glutamate.
**Except S. pyogenes (hyaluronic acid) and type B N. meningitidis (sialic acid), which are nonimmunogenic.
***Teichoic acid: polymers of ribitol or glycerol, bound to cell membrane or peptidoglycan.
40
APPENDIX I | REFERENCE CHARTS AND TABLES
Outer Surface Structures of the Bacterial Cell
Pilus or fimbria Primarily Gram -* Glycoprotein (pilin) Adherence to cell surfaces,
including attachment to
1. Common
other bacteria during
2. Sex
conjugation
3. Virulence
Flagellum + and - Protein (flagellin) Motility
Axial filaments Spirochetes gram - Protein Motility
(internal flagellum)
*M protein of group A strep described as diffuse fimbriate layer or fimbriae.
Internal Bacterial Structures*
Chemical
Structure Cell Type Composition Function
Nucleoid region Gram + and gram - DNA Genetic material (all
No membrane RNA essential genes)
No histones Proteins Primers, mRNA
No introns Linker proteins, polymerases
Plasmids Gram + and gram - DNA Non essential genetic
material
Roles in conjugation, drug
resistance, toxin production
Ribosomes Gram + and gram - 70S (protein/RNA) Protein synthesis
30S (16S RNA)
50S (23 and 5S)
Granules (various Gram + and gram - Glycogen, lipids, Storage: polymerization of
types) polyphosphate, molecules present in high
etc. numbers in cells reduces
osmotic pressure. Volutin
granules of Corynebacte
rium diphtheriae are used
in clinical identification.
Endospores Gram + only Keratin coat, Resistance to heat,
calcium chemicals, and dehydration
dipicolinate
*Note that there are no mitochondria or membrane bound structures, such as chloroplasts.
40

Microbiology Practice Questions
GENERAL MICROBIOLOGY
1. A 21 year old student presents with a complaint of pharyngitis.
Examination of the pharynx reveals patchy erythema and exudates on the
tonsillar pillars. Throat smear shows gram positive cocci in chains and
gram negative diplococci. He admits to being sexually active. What is the
significance of the Gram stain smear in this case?
A. Provides a rapid means of diagnosing the infection
B. Indicates lab contamination
C. Not useful, as it is not possible to make a diagnosis this way
D. Strongly suggests gonococcal pharyngitis
E. Is evidence of infection with hemolytic streptococci and Neisseriae
2. A patient presents with a non healing skin lesion, which the physician
biopsies and sends to pathology. The lab report indicates that the lesion
has the characteristics of a stellate granuloma. Which of the following is
most likely to be true of the causal agent?
A. It has lipopolysaccharide.
B. It has pili.
C. It is an exotoxin producer.
D. It is a superantigen.
E. It is intracellular.
3. A cancer chemotherapy patient has to have her intravenous port revised
after it becomes blocked and the catheter is found to contain bacterial con
taminants. Which of the following attributes is most likely to be a factor in
this pathogenesis?
A. Biofilm production
B. Ergosterol containing membrane
C. Peptidoglycan layer
D. Possession of IgA protease
E. Possession of pili
41
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
MEDICALLY IMPORTANT BACTERIA
4. A 4 year old boy develops several honey crusted lesions behind the ears
and on the face. What is the simplest test to determine the genus of bacteria
responsible for his illness?
A. Catalase test
B. Coagulase test
C. Growth of the organism in 6.5% sodium chloride
D. Hemolysis pattern on blood agar
E. Polymerase chain reaction
5. A homeless, malnourished man who suffers from chronic alcoholism pres
ents with severe headache and dyspnea. Physical examination reveals a
disheveled man with poor hygiene. His temperature is 41.0 C (105.8 F),
blood pressure is 110/78 mm Hg, and pulse is 96/min and regular.
Auscultation of the chest reveals absence of breath sounds over the left
middle lung fields. Chest x ray confirms left lobar pneumonia. Sputum
stain reveals partially acid fast bacilli with branching rods. Which of the
following agents is the most likely cause?
A. Mycobacterium avium intracellulare
B. Mycobacterium kansasii
C. Mycobacterium leprae
D. Mycobacterium tuberculosis
E. Nocardia asteroides
6. A 70 year old man presents to the emergency department with a fever of
39.7 C (103.5 F), a dry cough, tachypnea, and chest pain. History reveals he
has been smoking since he was a teen. He mentions that several people at
the assisted living community where he resides have had similar symptoms.
A sputum sample isolated organisms that grew on buffered charcoal yeast
extract agar and stained weakly gram negative. Which of the following
properties is consistent with the organism?
A. Capsule
B. No cell wall
C. Optochin sensitive
D. Requires iron and cysteine for growth
E. Serpentine growth in vitro
41
MICROBIOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
7. A 33 year old man presents to the emergency department with a fever of
39.1 C (102.4 F), facial palsy, headache, and malaise. A circular maculopap
ular rash was identified on the patients left shoulder; the patient was
unaware of the rash. The patient likely acquired the infection via which of
the following routes?
A. Consumption of contaminated food
B. Direct contact with fomite
C. Arthropod vector
D. Respiratory route
E. Sexual contact
8. A 25 year old man develops a high fever and swelling in the armpits and
groin. Aspirates from the lymph nodes reveal gram negative rods with
bipolar staining. The patient is most likely
A. a farmer
B. from the southwestern U.S.
C. in the military
D. living in a dormitory
E. sexually promiscuous
9. If a culture is inoculated to a density of 5 ́ 102 cells/mL at time 0 and has
both a generation time and lag time of 10 minutes, how many cells/mL will
there be at 40 minutes?
A. 1.5 ́ 103
B. 2 ́ 103
C. 4 ́ 103
D. 6 ́ 103
E. 4 ́ 106
10. A 6 year old girl who crashed in a sledding accident presents with com
plaints of pain in the perineal area. Exam shows only bruising of the area.
Two days later she develops fever, prostration, discoloration of the buttock,
and blebs of the skin in the area. After admission to the hospital, she devel
ops progressive involvement of the leg, thigh, and buttock with extension to
the lower abdomen. She goes into shock and dies before surgery can be per
formed. At autopsy, a 1 inch piece of wood is found in the perineum, which
had perforated the anus. The most likely causal agent
A. requires an elevated oxidation reduction potential
B. is a gram negative coccobacillus
C. is a marked lecithinase producer
D. is nonhemolytic on blood agar
E. is nonfermentative
41
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
11. A 71 year old man is admitted from his nursing home residence because of
recent aggravation of an exfoliative skin condition that has plagued him for
years. Over the past year he received a variety of topical antibiotic regimens.
He now has a temperature of 38.9 C (102 F). The skin of upper chest,
extremities, and neck shows erythema with diffuse epidermal peeling and
many pustular lesions. Cultures obtained from these lesions were reported
on the lab report as yielding a gram positive organism that is highly salt
(NaCl) tolerant. What lab result is used to confirm the species of the causal
agent?
A. Bacitracin sensitivity
B. Bile solubility
C. Catalase production
D. Coagulase production
E. Optochin sensitivity
12. After a communal dinner 4 days ago, 8 of 10 family practice residents now
have diarrhea with abdominal cramps, general malaise, and fever ranging
from 37.5 to 38.7 C (99.5 to 101.7 F). Stools from 3 residents are blood
tinged. Lab studies reveal the causal agent to be a microaerophilic gram
negative, curved rod with polar flagella often in pairs to give a “seagull”
appearance. It grew on special media at 42 C (107.6 F). The original con
tamination probably was found in
A. poultry
B. improperly canned food
C. fried rice
D. fish
E. vegetables
13. A 19 year old man was brought to the emergency department by his dorm
mate with a petechial rash, headache, nuchal rigidity, and vomiting. Which
of the following describes the most likely causal agent?
A. Gram negative coccus, capsule, ferments maltose
B. Gram negative coccus, ferments glucose only
C. Gram negative coccobacillus, capsular serotype b
D. Gram positive coccus, alpha hemolytic, optochin sensitive
E. Gram positive rods, growth at 4 C (39.2 F)
41
MICROBIOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
14. A 70 year old woman is brought to the emergency department by her
spouse with complaints of shortness of breath and fever. Physical examina
tion revealed a fever of 39.4 C (103.0 F), hypotension, and a diastolic mur
mur. History revealed a cardiac valve replacement five years earlier. Three
consecutive blood cultures taken during febrile periods revealed gram posi
tive cocci that were catalase positive and coagulase negative. Which of the
following organisms is the most likely cause?
A. Enterococcus faecalis
B. Kingella kingae
C. Staphylococcus aureus
D. Staphylococcus epidermidis
E. Staphylococcus saprophyticus
15. A tourist who recently returned from a trip to Peru goes to her physician
complaining of persistent high fever, malaise, and constipation that persist
ed over a week. She recalls that the fever began slowly and climbed to 41.0
C (105.8 F). Physical exam reveals an enlarged spleen and tender abdomen
with rose colored spots. Lab isolation of a bacterium that produces H2S
and is motile is revealed. Which organism is the most likely cause of her
condition?
A. EHEC
B. ETEC
C. Salmonella enterica subsp. enteritidis
D. Salmonella enterica subsp. typhi
E. Shigella dysenteriae
16. A 5 year old child of an Eastern European immigrant family is brought to
your pediatric clinic. The child is afebrile, but weak and exhausted from a
week of paroxysmal coughing with inspiratory whoops, frequently associat
ed with vomiting. The parents profess religious objections to childhood
vaccinations, but permit withdrawal of a blood sample, which reveals a
lymphocytosis of 44,000/mm3. Production of lymphocytosis, insulin secre
tion, and histamine sensitization are all results of which attribute of this
organism?
A. Motility
B. Adenylate cyclase toxin
C. Beta hemolysin
D. Anaerobic growth
E. Pertussis toxin
F. Filamentous hemagglutinin
41
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
17. A 65 year old man develops pneumonia. The organisms isolated from the
sputum are gram positive cocci that are alpha hemolytic on blood agar and
sensitive to optochin. Which structure of the causal agent provides protec
tion against phagocytosis?
A. Capsule
B. Catalase
C. Coagulase
D. M protein
E. Teichoic acid
18. A 68 year old woman on chemotherapy for leukemia has developed sepsis
due to an infection with Escherichia coli. The following day the patient
develops septic shock and dies. The structure on the bacterium most likely
responsible for causing septic shock in this patient is
A. capsule
B. lipopolysaccharide
C. pili
D. spore
E. teichoic acid
19. A 12 year old boy from North Carolina presents to the emergency depart
ment with rash, fever, and severe headache that began 3 days ago. The rash
began on his arms and legs and then spread to the trunk. The pediatrician
notes conjunctival redness, and lab tests reveal proteinuria. Which of the
following events likely led to the child’s illness?
A. Cutting himself while butchering rabbits
B. Eating undercooked meat
C. Hiking in the woods
D. Kissing
E. Not washing his hands
20. An 8 year old boy presents to the emergency department with vomiting
and a severe cough in which he can’t catch his breath. His vaccination histo
ry is incomplete. Physical exam reveals fever and conjunctival injection. A
nasopharyngeal aspirate grew gram negative coccobacilli on Bordet
Gengou media. What is the mechanism of action of the toxin involved?
A. ADP ribosylation of eukaryotic elongation factor 2 (eEF 2)
B. ADP ribosylation of Gi
C. ADP ribosylation of GTP binding protein
D. Blocks release of acetylcholine
E. Blocks release of inhibitory transmitters GABA and glycine
41
MICROBIOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
21. An infant presents to the emergency department due to difficulty breathing,
constipation, and anorexia. Upon examination, the physician notes flaccid
paralysis. A toxin screen of the stool identified the agent. What is the mech
anism of action of the toxin?
A. ADP ribosylation of eukaryotic elongation factor 2 (eEF 2)
B. ADP ribosylation of Gi
C. ADP ribosylation of GTP binding protein
D. Blocks release of acetylcholine
E. Blocks release of inhibitory transmitters GABA and glycine
22. A 10 year old girl with an incomplete vaccination history presents to her
pediatrician with a fever of 38.6 C (101.5 F), sore throat, malaise, and diffi
culty breathing. Physical examination reveals cervical lymphadenopathy
and a gray, leathery exudate in the rear of the oropharynx. The area bleeds
profusely when disturbed with a tongue depressor. Which of the following
correctly describes the causal agent?
A. Gram negative rod; toxin that inhibits protein synthesis
B. Gram negative rod; toxin that increases cAMP
C. Gram positive aerobic rod; toxin that inhibits protein synthesis
D. Gram positive anaerobic rod; toxin that inhibits protein synthesis
E. Gram positive aerobic rod; toxin that increases cAMP
23. A 13 year old girl presents to her pediatrician with fever, malaise, and a
sore throat. Physical examination reveals a fever of 39.4 C (103.0 F), cervi
cal lymphadenopathy, and pharyngeal erythema. A swab is taken from
some of the tonsillar exudate and cultured on blood agar. Culture reveals
beta hemolytic, gram positive cocci, and a rapid antigen test is positive.
What is the major component that protects the causal agent from osmotic
damage?
A. Lipopolysaccharide
B. Peptidoglycan
C. Phospholipids
D. Polysaccharide
E. Teichoic acid
24. A 16 year old has pneumonia with a dry, hacking cough. The x ray pattern
shows a light, diffuse infiltrative pattern. The most likely organism produc
ing these symptoms is
A. A non Gram–staining bacterium requiring sterols
B. A bacillus showing granules when stained with methylene blue
C. A bacitracin sensitive, catalase negative gram positive coccus
D. A coagulase positive, gram positive, catalase positive coccus in clusters
E. A gram positive bacillus grown on a low oxidation reduction medium
41
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
25. A 7 day old infant presents to the emergency department with a fever, poor
feeding, and a bulging fontanelle. During her physical examination, she
begins to convulse. A Gram stain of the CSF reveals gram positive rods.
Which of the following organisms is the most likely causal agent?
A. Escherichia coli
B. Haemophilus influenzae
C. Listeria monocytogenes
D. Neisseria meningitidis
E. Streptococcus agalactiae
26. A 40 year old homeless man presents to the emergency department with
fever and night sweats, coughing up blood. Acid fast bacilli are identified in
his sputum. Which of the following virulence factors allows the causal agent
to inhibit phagosome lysosome fusion to survive intracellularly?
A. Cord factor
B. Calcium dipicolinate
C. Peptidoglycan
D. Sulfatides
E. Tuberculin
27. A 28 year old woman presents to her gynecologist with complaints of a
malodorous vaginal discharge. Upon examination the physician notes a
thin, gray vaginal discharge with no vaginal redness. A whiff test was posi
tive for an amine odor. Which of the following is consistent with this case?
A. Clue cells
B. Gram negative diplococci in PMNs
C. Koilocytic cells
D. Owl eye inclusions
E. Tzanck smear
28. Several postal workers come down with symptoms of dyspnea, cyanosis,
hemoptysis, and chest pain. Chest x ray reveals mediastinal widening.
Sputum cultures are negative for all routine respiratory pathogens. Serology
correctly identifies the causal agent. Which of the following structures is
possessed by the causal agent?
A. Elementary body
B. Endotoxin
C. Periplasmic space
D. Reticulate body
E. Spore
41
MICROBIOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
29. A 25 year old man gets into a fight at the local bar and punches another
patron in the mouth. The following day his fist becomes infected and he
visits a local urgent care center. Exudate from the wound is cultured on
blood and chocolate agar and reveals gram negative rods that have a
bleach like odor. Which of the following agents is the most likely cause?
A. Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans
B. Cardiobacterium hominis
C. Eikenella corrodens
D. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
E. Kingella kingae
30. A 70 year old man is hospitalized for an infection and treated with
clindamycin. The patient improves and returns to his nursing home. Two
weeks later he is rushed to the emergency room with fever and loose,
mucoid green stools. The diarrhea is voluminous, and he is having severe
abdominal pain. Sigmoidoscopy of his colon reveals yellow white plaques.
What is the single most likely event/factor that contributed to this patient’s
current illness?
A. Administration of antibiotics
B. Advanced age
C. Drinking unpasteurized milk
D. Eating contaminated cold cuts
E. Living in nursing home
31. A 60 year old woman is hospitalized following a stroke and develops a
high grade fever with chills. She is catheterized due to urinary incontinence
and receives cephalosporin for treatment of pneumonia. Blood cultures and
Gram stain are performed by the lab. The organisms isolated are gram
positive cocci that are catalase negative and capable of growth in 6.5% sodi
um chloride. Which of the following is the most likely causal agent?
A. Enterococcus faecalis
B. Staphylococcus aureus
C. Staphylococcus epidermidis
D. Streptococcus pyogenes
E. Viridans streptococci
32. A 35 year old man who is positive for HIV develops sepsis with the subse
quent development of a necrotic lesion on the buttock that has a black cen
ter and an erythematous margin. Which of the following is the most likely
causal agent?
A. Bacillus anthracis
B. Clostridium perfringens
C. Enterococcus faecalis
D. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
E. Staphylococcus aureus
41
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
33. A patient is admitted to the hospital because of a bleeding duodenal ulcer.
Culture at 37.0 C (98.6 F) reveals a urease positive, gram negative, curved
rod. Which of the following is a likely complication due to infection with
the causal agent?
A. Diarrhea
B. Kidney stones
C. Pseudomembranous colitis
D. Stomach cancer
E. Vomiting
34. Roommates of a 19 year old college student become alarmed when he does
not get up to go to swim practice in the morning and they are unable to
wake him for his 11 AM class (he had complained of a headache and not
feeling well the night before). The rescue squad finds a febrile, comatose
young man with a petechial rash. In the emergency room, Kernig and
Brudzinski signs are present. No papilledema is seen, so a spinal tap is
done. Protein is high, glucose low. CSF WBC count is 9,000 (mainly PMNs)
with few RBCs. The characteristics of the most likely causal agent are
A. An enveloped dsDNA virus
B. A naked (+)ssRNA virus
C. A Gram negative bacillus with a polyribitol capsule
D. A Gram negative, oxidase positive diplococcus
E. A Gram positive, lancet shaped, alpha hemolytic diplococcus
MICROBIAL GENETICS/DRUG RESISTANCE
35. Which genetic material is found in pathogenic Corynebacterium diphtheriae
but not in nonpathogenic normal flora diphtheroids?
A. A diphthamide on eEF 2
B. An episome
C. An F factor
D. An integrated temperate phage
E. Highly repetitive bacterial DNA
42
MICROBIOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
36. If one cell of type one is mixed into a culture of 100 cells of type two, and
culture conditions are optimized for conjugation BUT NOT for cell divi
sion, the cellular genotype that would predominate after overnight incuba
tion would be that of
tr
oriT
D d
A a
C B c b
Cell #1 Cell #2
A. Cell #1
B. Cell #1 with new a, b, c, and d alleles
C. Cell #2 with new A, B, C, and D alleles
D. Cell #1 with a new a allele
E. Cell #2 with a new A allele
F. Cell #1 with new a and b alleles
G. Cell #1 with new A and B alleles
37. What bacterial gene transfer process is most sensitive to extracellular
nucleases?
A. Conjugation
B. Generalized transduction
C. Homologous recombination
D. Site specific recombination
E. Specialized transduction
F. Transformation
38. The ability of a cell to bind DNA to its surface and import it is required for
which genetic process?
A. Conjugation
B. Generalized transduction
C. Homologous recombination
D. Site specific recombination
E. Specialized transduction
F. Transformation
421
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
39. The process by which bacterial or plasmid DNA may be mistakenly incor
porated (during assembly) into one phage being produced by the lytic life
cycle and then that DNA transferred to another bacterial cell which may
acquire some new genetic traits is called
A. Conjugation
B. Generalized transduction
C. Homologous recombination
D. Site specific recombination
E. Specialized transduction
F. Transformation
40. Lysogenic conversion
A. is a change in pathogenicity due to the presence of a prophage.
B. is the induction of a prophage to its virulent state.
C. is the conversion of a virulent phage into a temperate phage.
D. refers to the incorporation of a prophage into the chromosome.
E. is the immunity that a prophage confers on a bacterium.
41. Which of the following events is most likely due to bacterial transformation?
A. A formerly non toxigenic strain of Corynebacterium diphtheriae becomes
toxigenic.
B. A non encapsulated strain of Streptococcus pneumoniae acquires a gene
for capsule formation from the extract of an encapsulated strain.
C. A strain of Neisseria gonorrhoeae starts producing a plasmid encoded
β lactamase similar to that another Gram negative strain.
D. A gene for gentamicin resistance from an Escherichia coli chromosome
appears in the genome of a bacteriophage that has infected it.
42. Which of the following agents, if introduced into a growing culture of bac
teria, would halt growth but, if then removed, would allow growth to
resume?
A. Antiseptic
B. Bacteriocide
C. Bacteriostat
D. Disinfectant
E. Sterilizing agent
42
MICROBIOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
43. A burn patient develops a purulent infection at the site of a skin graft.
Culture of the pus is positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The patient is
started on anti pseudomonal penicillin while a Kirby Bauer agar disc diffu
sion test is requested for the isolate. The results are shown.
A B
C
D E
What is the correct interpretation of these lab results?
A. The isolate is most sensitive to antibiotic B
B. The isolate is most sensitive to antibiotic C
C. The isolate is most sensitive to antibiotic E
D. The isolate is resistant to antibiotic B
E. Results cannot be analyzed without a key
MEDICALLY IMPORTANT VIRUSES
44. A 5 year old girl presents to the pediatrician with complaints of a sore
throat. Her mother also noticed that both of her eyes were slightly red.
Examination reveals rhinopharyngitis with bilateral conjunctivitis. What
activity likely led to the illness?
A. Hiking in a heavily wooded area
B. Eating undercooked shellfish
C. Playing with toys in a day care center
D. Traveling to a developing country
E. Swimming in a community pool
45. A 6 year old girl presents to the emergency department with a fever and a
lacy body rash. Her mother says that yesterday the rash was only on her
face, but by this morning, it had spread to her trunk and extremities. Which
of the following agents is most likely?
A. B19
B. HHV 6
C. Measles
D. Rubella
E. Varicella zoster virus
42
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
46. The best prospects for treatment and cure of microbial diseases are always
those unique factors of a pathogen’s life cycle that can be altered without
affecting the survival of the host’s own cells. In HIV, one such therapeutic
target would be the products of the pol gene, which codes for the reverse
transcriptase unique to the retroviral life cycle. If it were possible to ablate
expression of the HIV pol gene, what other aspect of the virus’s life cycle
would be directly altered?
A. Transcription from proviral DNA
B. Production of viral mRNA
C. Integration of proviral DNA
D. Nucleocapsid
E. Viral maturation
47. A 28 year old male ER resident was accidentally stuck with a needle from a
hepatitis B virus positive patient. He was too embarrassed to tell his attend
ing of his mistake. Two months later, he began to feel fatigued and lost his
appetite. When he ordered a hepatitis B serologic panel, he received the
results as follows:
HBsAg +
HBsAb -
HBcAb +
HBeAg +
HBeAb -
What is the status of the resident?
A. Acute infection
B. Chronic infection
C. Fulminant infection
D. Immune
E. Uninfected
48. A 10 year old boy is brought to the emergency department with a high
fever, chills, headache, and nausea. He vomits at admission, where his tem
perature is 40.1 C (104.2 F), and he begins to hallucinate. A CT scan reveals
encephalitis in one temporal lobe. Which of the following causal agents is
most likely?
A. California encephalitis
B. Herpes simplex virus 1
C. Polio virus
D. St. Louis encephalitis
E. West Nile virus
42
MICROBIOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
49. A 60 year old woman who recently received a liver transplant develops a
high fever and severe dyspnea with a dry hacking cough. Chest x ray
reveals bilateral interstitial infiltrates that are diffuse. Which of the follow
ing agents is most likely responsible for her condition?
A. Adenovirus
B. Cytomegalovirus
C. Influenza virus
D. Respiratory syncytial virus
E. Rhinovirus
50. An 8 year old boy from India was brought to the emergency department
while visiting the U.S. because of a flaccid paralysis in his lower extremities.
His mother explains that the child had a flu like illness a couple of weeks
earlier. How was the agent in the case likely acquired?
A. Fecal oral
B. Mosquito
C. Respiratory
D. Sexual
E. Tick
51. Infection of appropriate cells with a composite virus made up of Coxsackie
virus capsid components and poliovirus RNA would yield progeny which
would
A. Have the host cell range of Coxsackie virus
B. Also be composite viruses
C. Show phenotypic mixing
D. Have a recombinant genome consisting of both Coxsackie and poliovirus
E. React with Sabin vaccine–induced antibodies
52. An epidemic of nausea, vomiting, and watery diarrhea breaks out on ship
board during a cruise to the Virgin Islands. Which of the following accu
rately describes the most likely causal agent?
A. Acid fast oocysts
B. Enveloped DNA virus
C. Enveloped RNA virus
D. Nonenveloped DNA virus
E. Nonenveloped RNA virus
42
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
53. To design a vaccine against HIV infection, a logical goal would be to alter
some native molecule or product of the virion in order to make it highly
immunogenic. If you wished to prevent the attachment of the virus to
helper T lymphocytes, which molecule or family of molecules might best
be targeted?
A. gp41
B. gp120
C. nucleocapsid protein
D. p17
E. p24
54. A woman in her late twenties presents to the emergency department disori
ented and confused. She is unable to remember where she lived or even her
phone number. She is admitted for observation and testing and begins to
hallucinate and salivate excessively. On the East coast of the United States,
what is the most common reservoir of this disease?
A. Bat
B. Cat
C. Dog
D. Fox
E. Raccoon
55. A 37 year old executive for a local Health Maintenance Organization comes
to your office because he has developed multiple blister like lesions on his
penis over the last 1–2 days. They are somewhat painful, and he is worried
that he has AIDS. He denies homosexuality and intravenous drug abuse
and had an HIV test prior to his marriage three years ago. He reports sever
al similar episodes several years ago when he worked as a photographer in
Nepal. He was never told what they were, and they resolved over several
days without any treatment. His physical examination is remarkable only
for the presence of 6–8 vesicular lesions 3–4 mm in diameter on the glans
of the penis. There is no crusting, drainage, or bleeding. The lesions are
moderately tender and there is mild inguinal adenopathy bilaterally. How
does the causal agent produce its messenger RNA?
A. By producing a positive sense intermediate
B. By direct translation from the genome
C. By transcription from proviral DNA
D. By producing a negative sense intermediate
E. By transcribing from the genomic DNA
F. By reverse transcription from the genome
G. By semi conservative replication
42
MICROBIOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
56. Several individuals in the central United States from the ages of 5 to 25 have
come down with symptoms of nausea, vomiting, and swelling of the parotid
glands. Which of the following can be a complication of the disease?
A. Guillain Barré syndrome
B. Glomerulonephritis
C. Orchitis
D. Multiple sclerosis
E. Reye syndrome
57. Which of these viruses has RNA for both its genome and replicative inter
mediate?
A. Cytomegalovirus
B. Hepadnavirus
C. Retroviruses
D. Togaviruses
E. Poxvirus
58. A 19 year old male college student reports sore throat and extreme fatigue
following even normal non taxing tasks like getting dressed and going
down to breakfast. He tells you that he has been sick for several weeks, that
he has been feverish, and that his girlfriend now appears to be getting the
same thing. His tonsils are inflamed with a white exudate adhering; cervical
lymphadenopathy is prominent, as is splenomegaly. The most likely causal
agent is
A. ssDNA, naked icosahedral virus
B. dsDNA, naked icosahedral virus
C. dsDNA, enveloped complex virus
D. dsDNA, enveloped icosahedral virus
E. dsRNA, naked segmented virus
F. -ssRNA, segmented, enveloped and helical virus
G. -ssRNA, bullet shaped, helical virus
H. -ssRNA, naked, helical virus
I. +ssRNA, naked, icosahedral virus
J. +ssRNA, enveloped, icosahedral virus
K. +ssRNA, enveloped, diploid virus
59. A 15 year old student on the high school swim team notices painless,
umbilicated cutaneous lesions on the toes. Large eosinophilic cytoplasmic
inclusions are present in the affected epithelia. What is the most likely
causal agent?
A. Adenovirus
B. B19 virus
C. Molluscum contagiosum virus
D. Herpes simplex virus
E. Human papilloma virus
42
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
MEDICALLY IMPORTANT FUNGI
60. An obese 32 year old diabetic woman presents with complaint of red and
painful skin in her abdominal skin folds. Examination reveals a creamy
white material at the base of the fold. It is erythematous underneath and
extends beyond the creamy material. Microscopic examination of the exu
date reveals oval budding structures (3 ́ 6 μm) mixed with more budding
elongated forms. The most likely causal agent is
A. Aspergillus fumigatus
B. Candida albicans
C. Epidermophyton floccosum
D. Microsporum canis
E. Sporothrix schenckii
61. A 19 year old migrant worker from the southwestern U.S. is brought to the
family doctor complaining of cough, pleuritic chest pain, fever, and malaise.
He also complains of a backache and headache. He is found to have an
erythematous skin rash on his lower limbs. A chest radiograph reveals
several calcifying lesions. Which of the following structures is most likely to
be found?
A. Broad based budding yeast
B. Monomorphic encapsulated yeast
C. Nonseptate hyphae with broad angles
D. Septate hyphae branching dichotomously at acute angles
E. Spherules with endospores
62. An 18 year old high school student in rural north Mississippi develops
fever, cough, and chest pain. The cough, associated with weight loss, per
sisted. Because of poor performance at football practice, he was advised to
see a physician. Lymph node biopsies stained with H and E reveal granulo
matous inflammation and macrophages engorged with oval structures mea
suring 2–4 μm. Cultures incubated at room temperature grow powdery
white colonies, which on microscopic study have tuberculate spores. The
student most likely acquired the infection from which of the following?
A. Desert sand
B. Cat feces
C. Soil enriched with bird excrement
D. Another human via respiratory secretions
E. Contaminated drinking water
42
MICROBIOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
63. A 55 year old man who recently recovered uneventfully from a heart valve
transplant presents to the emergency room with pleuritic chest pain,
hemoptysis, fever, and chills. While he is being examined, he has a myocar
dial infarction and the medical team is unable to revive him. An autopsy
revealed septate, acutely branching hyphae in many tissues. Which of the
following organisms is most likely to be identified?
A. Aspergillus fumigatus
B. Blastomyces dermatitidis
C. Cryptococcus neoformans
D. Histoplasma capsulatum
E. Mucor species
64. A 33 year old HIV positive man complains of headache and blurred vision.
Physical examination reveals papilledema and ataxia. A head CT scan is nor
mal, but CSF obtained by lumbar puncture reveals encapsulated organisms
visible by India ink. Which of the following is true concerning this organism?
A. It can also be seen as “spaghetti and meatballs” on KOH stain
B. It consists of branching septate hyphae
C. It exists as a mycelial form at room temperature and a yeast at 37 C (98.6 F)
D. It is an encapsulated nondimorphic yeast found worldwide
E. It is a nonencapsulated dimorphic yeast that reproduces by budding
65. A 32 year old man who has AIDS presents to his physician with progres
sively increasing dyspnea over the past 3 weeks. He also complains of a dry,
painful cough, fatigue, and low grade fever. A chest x ray reveals bilateral
symmetrical interstitial and alveolar infiltration. Which of the following
agents is the most likely cause?
A. Cryptococcus neoformans
B. Cryptosporidium parvum
C. Histoplasma capsulatum
D. Pneumocystis jiroveci
E. Toxoplasma gondii
MEDICAL PARASITOLOGY
66. At a school nurse’s request, a clinic in rural South Carolina sees a 9 year old
girl who appears listless and inattentive, although hearing and visual testing
has been within normal limits. The physician finds the child thin, with the
“potbelly” of malnutrition, and orders a fecal exam and CBC. The CBC
reveals a microcytic, hypochromic anemia, and the fecal exam detects
brown, oval nematode eggs approximately 65 microns in size, too numerous
to count. What was the most likely means by which this child was infected?
A. Ingestion of ova
B. Ingestion of larvae
C. Ingestion of cysts in muscle
D. Skin penetration by larvae
E. Mosquito transmission of sporozoites
42
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
67. A 35 year old captain in the army reserves has been plagued by a painful,
erosive lesion near his ear lobe since his return from Operation Desert
Storm years ago. He denies exposure to the toxic by products of burning oil
fields. Punch biopsy of the leading edge of the erosion reveals macrophages
distended with oval amastigotes. How was this infection acquired?
A. Contact with contaminated drinking water
B. Bite of Anopheles mosquito
C. Bite of reduviid bug
D. Fecal contamination of food
E. Direct human contact in barracks
F. Bite of sandfly
G. Bite of tsetse fly
68. A group of 6 college students undertake to climb Mt. Rainier outside Seattle
on their spring break. They pack food and camping provisions except for
water, which they obtain from the many fresh water mountain streams that
arise at the summit. The adventure takes a little over a week to accomplish,
and all return safely in good spirits to their classes the following week.
Within the first week after their return, 5 of the 6 students report to the
infirmary with profuse diarrhea and tenesmus. Each affected student expe
riences weakness and weight loss, and stool samples submitted to the lab
are yellow, greasy, and foul smelling. What attribute of this parasite imparts
its pathogenicity?
A. Lytic enzymes
B. Flagella
C. Ventral sucking disc
D. Encystment
E. Toxic metabolites
69. Four weeks after his arrival from Egypt, a 24 year old graduate student
presents with blood in his urine. Microscopic examination of his urine
reveals the presence of eggs with terminal spines. In the interview he admits
that he has been working on his family’s rice field occasionally since his
early childhood. The most likely etiologic agent of his complaint is
A. Entamoeba histolytica
B. Fasciolopsis buski
C. Schistosoma haematobium
D. Schistosoma japonicum
E. Schistosoma mansoni
43
MICROBIOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
70. A 30 year old woman presents to her gynecologist with complaints of vagi
nal itching and a frothy, yellow discharge. She also complains of painful uri
nation. She admits to being sexually active with several men in the past two
weeks. Cultures are negative for bacterial growth, but organisms are visible
via a wet prep on low power. The most likely causal agent is
A. Candida albicans
B. Trichophyton rubrum
C. Chlamydia trachomatis
D. Trichomonas vaginalis
E. Giardia lamblia
71. A 30 year old missionary comes to the emergency department complaining
of high fever, chills, severe headache, and confusion. He has recently
returned from Africa. A peripheral blood smear reveals multiple ring struc
tures and crescent shaped gametes. Which of the following organisms is the
most likely cause?
A. Leishmania species
B. Plasmodium falciparum
C. Plasmodium malariae
D. Plasmodium ovale
E. Plasmodium vivax
72. A 3 year old girl presents to her pediatrician with intense perianal itching.
Her mother explains that the child has also been extremely irritable during
the day and has not been sleeping well at night. Eggs with a flattened side
were identified by the lab technician from a piece of scotch tape brought
in by the parent. Infection with which of the following organisms is most
likely?
A. Ascaris lumbricoides
B. Echinococcus granulosus
C. Entamoeba histolytica
D. Enterobius vermicularis
E. Trichuris trichiura
43
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
CLINICAL INFECTIOUS DISEASE
Case Histories
Case A: A 28 year old known alcoholic man presents with fever and productive
cough. He was basically well until 3 days ago when he noticed perspira
tion, cough, shaking chills, and headache. His cough has been associated
with the production of a yellowish green sputum, which occasionally was
tinged with brownish streaks, but was not foul smelling. A Gram stain
shows Gram positive cocci in pairs and short chains.
A. What lab tests could you use to identify the genus?
Answer: Catalase test (negative) to genus.
B. When plated on blood agar, what other bacterium might you isolate
and confuse the causal agent with, and why? What test(s) could dis
tinguish the two?
Answer: Viridans strep; optochin and bile.
C. What procedure would you perform to type the isolate?
Answer: Quellung reaction with known antibodies to capsule (not
antibodies to cell wall antigens).
Case B: The patient in Case A developed meningitis and died.
A. What would be the expected CSF cell count?
Answer: High.
B. What would be the expected CSF protein and sugar values?
Answer: Protein high, sugar low.
Case C: A 46 year old man who is HIV positive complains of malaise, weight
loss, fever, and night sweats of 6 weeks duration. More recently, he has
developed a cough productive of bloody sputum. Physical exam reveals
bronchial breath sounds with crepitant rales over the right upper chest.
His CD4 cell count is 560 cells/mm3. Auramine rhodamine stain of the
sputum is positive, and a chest radiograph reveals hilar lymphadenopathy
with a small cavity and streaky infiltrates in the upper lobe.
A. What attribute of the most likely causal agent promotes its survival in
reticuloendothelial cells?
Answer: Sulfatides are sulfolipids which hydrolyze to make sulfuric acid.
They impede the fusion of lysosomes with the phagosome.
B. What attribute of the causal agent is injected in order to elicit a posi
tive skin test?
Answer: Tuberculin (outermost protein) plus mycolic acids (long chain
fatty acids in the envelope)
C. What immune cells are most important in the response to this agent?
Answer: Th1 cells and macrophages (granuloma formation)
43
MICROBIOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
Case D: A patient presents with multiple, crusted and oozing, honey colored
lesions.
A. What is the skin infection?
Answer: Impetigo.
B. What two bacteria would you expect to isolate on culture?
Answer: Streptococcus pyogenes (often honey colored crusted) and/or
Staphylococcus aureus (often longer lasting vesicular or with
bullae).
C. How would you separate the two?
Answer: Catalase test positive for Staphylococcus, negative for
Streptococcus.
Case E: A patient had intermittent bouts of general malaise, fever with weight
loss, and progressive anemia. She presents also with a heart murmur.
A. What additional physical sign might occur and what causes it?
Answer: Splinter hemorrhages are caused as septic emboli are thrown
from heart valves. They are also seen in trichinosis and
trauma.
B. What is her underlying condition and what are the most commonly
involved bacteria?
Answer: Damaged heart valve; viridans streptococci (associated with
bad oral hygiene or dental work) or Enterococcus faecalis or
E. faecium if she has had bowel surgery.
C. How would you distinguish the colony on blood agar?
Answer: Alpha hemolytic not inhibited by optochin; viridans
streptococci.
43
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Case F: A mother brings her youngest child to the emergency room because of
fever and a stiff neck. The 18 month old child is acutely ill with a tem
perature of 40.0 C (104.0 F). CSF is Gram stained, examined in a rapid
test, and also cultured. A Gram stain shows pleomorphic, gram negative
rods.
A. What lab test could confirm the identity of the isolate?
Answer: Meningitis screen, a series of immunologic rapid identifica
tion tests (usually EIAs using known antibodies), followed by
growth of CSF sediment or filtrate on special media and drug
susceptibilities.
B. What growth factors are required to grow the isolate on blood agar?
Answer: X = hemin and V = NAD. Chocolate agar provides both X
and V.
C. What is the drug of choice?
Answer: Cefotaxime or ceftriaxone.
D. What is the mechanism of action of the vaccine which would have
prevented this condition?
Answer: It is a conjugated vaccine containing the polyribitol phosphate
capsular material of the most important serotype (the hapten)
covalently coupled to the diphtheria toxoid (protein carrier).
The hapten stimulates the B lymphocyte, the carrier stimulates
the Th cell, and together, isotype switching becomes possible so
that something other than IgM is made.
Case G: A 23 year old woman presents with lower back pain, fever, and dysuria
of 3 days’ duration. Urinalysis reveals many white blood cells (WBC)
and WBC casts. Gram stain of the uncentrifuged urine reveals numer
ous Gram negative bacilli per oil immersion field. On culture, extremely
motile bacteria form waves of confluent growth.
A. What is the most important biochemical characteristic of this organ
ism? Why?
Answer: Proteus, urease producing Enterobacteriaceae; kidney stones
induced.
43
MICROBIOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
Case H: A child developed a unilateral mucopurulent conjunctivitis 10 days after
birth. A conjunctival specimen was sent to the lab and inoculated into
tissue culture cells. Iodine staining inclusion bodies were produced.
A. What is unusual about the chemical makeup of the organism?
Answer: ATP defective mutant, also muramic acid missing from
peptidoglycan.
B. What are the two forms of the organism?
Answer: Elementary bodies (extracellular) and reticulate bodies =
replicating forms.
C. What would you see on Gram stain?
Answer: Nothing in the cells—poorly Gram staining.
D. What serologic type caused the child’s problem?
Answer: If U.S. kid, serotypes D K.
Case I: A 27 year old attorney is hospitalized. He was in excellent health until
two days earlier when he noted malaise, fatigability, and profound an
orexia. He remembers approximately 6–8 weeks ago receiving a tattoo
while vacationing in the Caribbean.
A. How would you confirm your clinical diagnosis?
Answer: HBsAg and IgM to HbcAg.
B. What is meant by the “window”?
Answer: A time period between the end of the detectable presence of
HBsAg and the beginning of the production of HBsAb. HBcAb
and HBeAb are present.
C. What antigen’s persistence beyond 6 months post infection is indica
tive that the patient is entering a carrier state?
Answer: HBsAg past 6 months.
D. What antigen correlates with viral production?
Answer: HBeAg.
E. Does the virus carry a virion associated polymerase? If so, what kind?
Answer: Yes, RNA dependent DNA polymerase (Hepatitis B replicates
through an RNA intermediate).
43
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Case J: A young man became ill with a sore throat and swollen tonsils, marked
fatigue, cervical adenopathy, a palpable spleen, and a pruritic erythema
tous rash that started after self administration of ampicillin.
A. What is the most likely disease? What are the most common lab diag
nostic tests? What does the antibody test measure?
Answer: Infectious mononucleosis; monospot test (measures heterophile
antibody which is not specific to EBV antigen) plus CBC.
B. What type of cells are the Downey type II cells?
Answer: T lymphocytes. (Reactive cells, not infected.)
C. What cells does the virus infect? Through what receptor does the
lymphocytic infection begin?
Answer: EBV infects epithelial cells and B lymphocytes, whose receptor
is CD21 = CR2.
Case K: A 35 year old woman presents with a unilateral vesicular rash.
A. The most likely diagnosis is
Answer: Shingles.
B. Describe the virion’s nucleic acid.
Answer: Linear dsDNA.
C. Patient had a previous history of what other disease?
Answer: Chickenpox.
Case L: A 27 year old man presents to the hospital emergency room with a
cough, chest pain, and fever. Two days before admission he developed a
nonproductive cough. Rales are heard. Gram stain of sputum was nega
tive. Sputum cultures on blood agar were also negative. Culture on a spe
cial medium containing cholesterol, purines, and pyrimidines produced
colonies in 10 days. Serology 3 weeks later (when he returned because of
persistent cough but feeling better) showed cold agglutinins.
A. What is the probable causal agent?
Answer: Mycoplasma pneumoniae.
B. Why did the organism not show up on the Gram stain?
Answer: Organism does not have a cell wall and does not stain with
either the primary or counterstain in the Gram stain.
C. What antibiotics do you NOT use?
Answer: Penicillin/cephalosporin.
43
MICROBIOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
Case M: A 65 year old retired male police officer reports to an emergent care facil
ity complaining of fever, sore throat, shortness of breath, dry cough, and
generalized muscle aches and pains. On examination the patient is pale,
tachycardic, and tachypneic. His conjunctivae are congested and rales and
wheezes are heard over both lung fields. A chest radiograph shows diffuse
bilateral infiltrates and a hemagglutination inhibition antibody test is
positive at high titer.
A. What is your diagnosis?
Answer: Influenza
B. What drugs are available to treat this disease?
Answer: Amantadine/rimantadine (inhibit uncoating) Zanamivir/osel
tamivir (inhibit neuraminidase)
C. To what viral family does it belong?
Answer: Orthomyxovirus
D. Where in the cell does it replicate?
Answer: Cytoplasm and nucleus
E. What vaccine might have prevented this?
Answer: Killed, H3N2, H1N1 plus one strain of Influenza B
F. What attribute of the agent causes pandemics?
Answer: Segmented genome can be reassorted, causing genetic shift.
Case N: A 4 year old boy is brought to the pediatrician by his mother, who is
concerned by his lack of appetite and loss of weight. He has had diarrhea
fairly constantly over the preceding two week period, which occasionally
has been associated with vomiting. On examination, the child is in the
60% percentile of weight for his age and has mild epigastric tenderness.
A fresh stool sample, collected rectally, is yellow, greasy and malodorous
and contains motile organisms.
A. To what taxonomic group does this causal agent belong?
Answer: (Giardia lamblia) Flagellated protozoan
B. How was this child infected?
Answer: Fecal/oral contamination with cysts
C. What is the mechanism of pathogenesis?
Answer: Organism adheres in the upper duodenum using a ventral
sucking disk. This blocks common bile ducts, causes fat malab
sorption and steatorrhea.
43
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Case O: A 35 year old worker at a plant nursery seeks his physician for a suppu
rative lesion on one of his fingers. A smear is taken of the drainage and
stained. Cigar shaped yeasts are detected.
A. What is the causal agent?
Answer: Sporothrix schenckii.
B. Is the fungus dimorphic or monomorphic?
Answer: This is DIMORPHIC FUNGUS consistent with Sporothrix. You
can tell from cigar shaped yeast (in tissues generally tough to
visualize) and hyphae with sleeve and rosettes arrangement of
conidia in culture.
C. Treatment
Answer: Itraconazole but oral KI given in milk will also clear up.
Case P: A missionary returns to the United States from Central America with
high fever, chills, headache, and confusion. On examination his tempera
ture is 39 C (102.2 F) and he is pale and tachycardic. Both liver and spleen
are enlarged and tender to palpation. Lab tests reveal microcytic anemia,
thrombocytopenia, hyperbilirubinemia, and hypoglycemia, and a blood
film is examined.
A. What is the diagnosis?
Answer: Plasmodium vivax malaria
B. What is the treatment?
Answer: Chloroquine, quinine, amodiaquine, fansidar, halofantrine etc.
(Lots of drug resistance is now occurring)
C. Is primaquine required? Why or why not?
Answer: Yes, to prevent relapse and kill hypnozoites. This is called “radi
cal cure” and it is necessary for P. vivax and P. ovale malarias.
D. How did the patient acquire this disease?
Answer: Bite of female Anopheles mosquito injects sporozoites.
43
MICROBIOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
Case Q: A 50 year old Missouri farmer was referred to the hospital because of
malaise, weakness, weight loss, fever, and a palpable spleen. Examination
of the mouth reveals a painless ulcerated lesion. A punch biopsy of the
lesion is obtained and submitted for lab study. Histologic study revealed
oval structures measuring 2–5 μm, packing the macrophages.
A. What is the most likely causal agent, and what are the distinctive
forms?
Answer: Histoplasma capsulatum with the intracellular oval yeasts and
the tuberculate macroconidia (and microconidia) in the hyphal
state.
B. Where in nature will you find the fungus in large numbers?
Answer: Great central riverbed plains. Chicken coops in Missouri 100%
infected. Indianapolis has had an ongoing outbreak and has
major problems with it disseminating in their AIDS patients;
NY City also high.
Case R: A 75 year old woman who has suffered chronic otitis media is brought to
the hospital by the staff of her long term care facility. She has complained
of dizziness and drowsiness, and preliminary examination reveals signs of
meningismus. A CT scan is negative for parenchymal lesions of the brain,
although the mastoid cavities are inflamed. A lumbar puncture reveals
2130 leukocytes/μL, 1.55 mm glucose/L (concomitant blood sugar
2.6 mmol/L), and 1582 mg protein/L. Gram staining organisms are ab
sent, but filamentous forms are cultured.
A. What is your diagnosis?
Answer: Aspergillus fumigatus meningitis
B. How would you describe this organism?
Answer: it is a monomorphic, dematiaceous fungus
C. What is the treatment of choice?
Answer: Amphotericin B or itraconazole
43
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Case S: A 34 year old accountant presents to the emergency room because of
headache and fever of 3 days’ duration. The day before admission his wife
noted mild confusion and irritability. Lumbar puncture revealed an open
ing pressure of 300 mm, 200 red blood cells, 90% of the WBCs which are
lymphocytes, sugar of 85 mg/dL (concomitant blood sugar of 110 mg/
dL), and protein of 65 mg/dL. Bacteriologic smears (and ultimately also
the bacterial cultures) were negative, as were India ink preparations. All
latex particle agglutination tests for fungal and bacterial capsules done
on the patient’s CSF were also negative. The patient’s condition did not
improve despite appropriate therapy, and he died 10 days after hospital
ization.
A. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Answer: Herpes simplex encephalitis
B. What is the virus’s shape?
Answer: Icosahedral with nuclear membrane envelope.
C. Where within the cell does the virus replicate?
Answer: Nucleus for both DNA synthesis and assembly.
D. What other members belong to the same family?
Answers: EBV, Varicella Zoster, Cytomegalovirus.
Case T: A 20 year old man presents to the emergency department complaining of
profuse bloody diarrhea of two days duration. On examination he has a purpuric
rash over a large portion of his body, although his temperature is normal. The pa
tient is dehydrated and weak, and lab values reveal an elevated blood urea nitrogen
and creatinine, with thrombocytopenia. PT and PTT are within normal limits.
Culture of the feces grew organisms which produced both colorless and colored
colonies on sorbitol MacConkey medium.
A. What is your diagnosis?
Answer: Enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli, (EHEC)
B. What is the most likely source of his infection?
Answer: Hamburger, fecal contamination from bovine feces
C. What is the most likely serotype in the United States?
Answer: O157:H7
D. What is the mechanism of pathogenesis?
Answer: Toxin (verotoxin) is Shiga like and inhibits the 60S ribosomal
subunit, thereby stopping eukaryotic protein synthesis.
44
MICROBIOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
Case U: A patient presents with anogenital warts.
A. What is the virus that probably caused the tumors?
Answer: Human papilloma virus.
B. What serotypes are most commonly associated with this clinical pre
sentation?
Answer: 6 and 11
C. Are they premalignant?
Answer: Rarely.
D. What serotypes are most commonly associated with cervical intraepi
thelial neoplasia?
Answer: 16, 18, and 31. These are sexually transmitted.
E. What type of vaccine is now available that could have prevented this
infection?
Answer: 4 serotypes of capsid protein created by recombinant DNA
technology.
Case V: A girl received a bone marrow transplant for the treatment of leukemia.
Nine weeks after the transplant her temperature rose, she became dys
pneic and died. Impression smears were taken from the cut surface of the
lower lobe of the left lung. The smears were stained with H&E. Intra
nuclear inclusions with perinuclear clearing were found.
A. Why did the patient develop pneumonia?
Answer: Immunocompromised—No T cells.
B. How would you describe what you would see (using only two words)?
Answer: Owl’s eyes: cells with prominent basophilic intranuclear inclu
sion bodies.
C. What is the virion’s nucleic acid type? To what viral family does it
belong?
Answer: dsDNA; Herpes viruses.
44
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
Case W: A young woman developed a feverish illness with painful swelling of her
knee, elbow, and wrist joints. She has a sparse rash on the distal parts of
her limbs, consisting of small hemorrhagic pustules with an erythema
tous base. A smear was obtained from the exudate of the exanthem and
Gram stained. The stain showed intracellular gram negative diplococci.
A. What disease does she have?
Answer: Disseminated gonococcal infection.
B. What is the major mechanism of pathogenesis?
Answer: Pili, for attachment to epithelial surfaces—colonizing factor
along with outer membrane proteins. Also exhibit antigenic
variation and protect from phagocytosis.
44
MICROBIOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
ANSWERS AND EXPLANATIONS
Microbiology Practice Questions
1. Answer: C. Gram positive cocci (alpha hemolytic streptococci) and gram
negative cocci (Neisseriae) are normally present in the throat. There is no
way to differentiate pathogens from non pathogens by the Gram stain.
2. Answer: E. The attribute of microorganisms that associates most strongly
with the causation of granulomas is that they live intracellularly. This causes
stimulation of the Th1 arm of the immune response, and the production of
the cytokines of cell mediated immunity, with the net result of the forma
tion of granulomas in the infected tissues. Some organisms that are extra
cellular will also produce granulomas, but in those cases it is generally the
chronic persistence and indigestibility of the pathogen which cause that
result. Lipopolysaccharide (choice A) is a synonym for endotoxin, which
causes gram negative shock, but not granuloma formation. Pili (choice B)
are surface structures of some bacteria which mediate attachment to cellu
lar surfaces. Exotoxins (choice C) are secreted toxins which may cause cell
damage in a number of ways, and superantigens (choice D) cause stimula
tion of large numbers of clones of T lymphocytes and macrophages to cause
symptoms similar to endotoxin shock.
3. Answer: A. Catheters, shunts and prosthetic devices that are left in the
body long term are almost always coated with polytetrafluoroethylene
(Teflon), which is very slippery. Organisms that are capable of adhering to
Teflon (or the enamel of teeth) do so by creating a biofilm, which allows
them to change the surface tension of the liquid around them and “glue”
themselves to the material. Ergosterol (choice B) is the major sterol in the
cell wall of fungi, and is important in membrane integrity, but not adher
ence. Peptidoglycan (choice C) is the cell wall material of bacteria, and is
responsible for the shape of bacteria, but not their adherence. IgA proteases
(choice D) can assist in the adherence of bacteria to mucosal surfaces but
would not be important in adherence to an intravenous catheter, and
although pili (choice E) mediate attachment of bacteria to human cells,
they would not be important in adherence to Teflon.
4. Answer: A. The easiest way to differentiate between Staphylococcus and
Streptococcus is the catalase test. This is important because they can have
similar presentations. Coagulase (choice B) differentiates between members
of the genus Staphylococcus. Hemolysis pattern (choice D) is inconclusive.
Growth of organism in sodium chloride (choice C) can be useful for
Enterococcus. PCR (choice E) is currently used to identify organisms that
are difficult to culture.
5. Answer: E. Partially acid fast branching rods in a patient with lobar pneu
monia suggest Nocardia. All the other agents listed are acid fast bacilli, not
branching rods.
44
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
6. Answer: D. The causal agent is Legionella pneumophila. The clues are dry
cough, smoking, weakly gram negative, and growth on buffered charcoal
yeast agar. Remember that Legionella is one of the 4 sisters ELLA that wor
ship in the cysteine chapel. Other sisters include Francisella, Brucella, and
Pasteurella. A capsule (choice A) would identify agents such as
Streptococcus pneumoniae. No cell wall (choice B) describes Mycoplasma.
Optochin sensitive (choice C) also describes Streptococcus pneumoniae.
Serpentine growth in vitro (choice E) describes Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
7. Answer: C. The causal agent is Borrelia burgdorferi, and the disease is
known as Lyme disease. The clues are facial palsy, rash, fever and malaise.
Borrelia is spread by ticks.
8. Answer: B. The causal agent is Yersinia pestis. The clues are high fever,
swelling in the armpits and groin, and gram negative rods with bipolar
staining. Yersinia pestis is endemic in the U.S. in the desert southwest.
9. Answer: C. Each cell divides into two at each generation following the sin
gle lag phase. So at the end of the first 10 minutes there are still 5 ́ 102,
and then at the end of the first 20 minutes (total) there are 10 ́ 102. At the
end of 30 minutes total time there will be 20 ́ 102, and at the end of the
total time, 40 ́ 102, which is written 4 ́ 103 in proper scientific notation.
10. Answer: C. The description strongly suggests that she has myonecrosis, so
the causal agent (at least one) is C. perfringens. C. perfringens is an anaer
obe; therefore (choice A) is wrong. Clostridia are all gram positive,
so (choice B) is wrong. C. perfringens produces concentric areas of hemoly
sis, so (choice D) is wrong. C. perfringens is a marked lecithinase producer,
so choice C is correct.
11. Answer: D. The patient has “scalded skin” syndrome caused by S. aureus.
The genus Staphylococcus would be distinguished from Streptococcus by
staphylococcal production of catalase. But the species (S. aureus) would be
distinguished from S. epidermidis on the basis of S. aureus production of
coagulase. Bacitracin sensitivity is characteristic of Streptococcus pyogenes,
and bile solubility is characteristic of Streptococcus pneumoniae.
12. Answer: A. The clue is gram negative curved rods with polar flagella often
in pairs to give a “seagull” appearance, microaerophilic on special media
and growing at 42 C. That description is most compatible with
Campylobacter jejuni. Poultry are the most important reservoirs, so (choice
A) is the correct response.
13. Answer: A. The causal agent is Neisseria meningitidis. The clues are age,
dorm room, petechial rash, and nuchal rigidity. Neisseria meningitidis is a
gram negative diplococcus and can ferment maltose. Remember that
Neisseria meningitidis can ferment maltose. Gram negative coccus, ferments
glucose only (choice B) describes Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Gram negative
coccobacillus, capsular serotype b (choice C) describes Haemophilus influ
enzae. Gram positive coccus, alpha hemolytic, optochin sensitive (choice
D) describes Streptococcus pneumoniae. Gram positive rods, growth at 4.0
C (39.2 F) (choice E) describes Listeria monocytogenes.
44
MICROBIOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
14. Answer: D. The clues are endocarditis, heart valve replacement, and gram
positive cocci that are catalase positive and coagulase negative. Many times
Staphylococcus epidermidis can be a contaminant, but the fact that it was
present in 3 consecutive blood cultures identifies it as the causal agent.
Enterococcus faecalis (choice A) is catalase negative. Kingella kingae (choice
B) is a gram negative rod. Staphylococcus aureus (choice C) is coagulase
positive. Staphylococcus saprophyticus (choice E) is the causal agent of UTIs,
not endocarditis.
15. Answer: D. The clues are travel, constipation, which is more common than
diarrhea, enlarged spleen, and rose colored spots on the abdomen. It also is
an H2S producer and motile. Remember, salmon(ella) swim upstream (are
motile). EHEC (choice A) does not produce H2S and produces bloody diar
rhea. ETEC (choice B) does not produce H2S and produces watery diar
rhea. Salmonella enterica subsp. enteritidis (choice C) diarrhea (watery, can
be bloody) is associated with consumption of raw or undercooked poultry.
Shigella dysenteriae (choice E) does not produce H2S and causes bloody
diarrhea.
16. Answer: E. The disease here is whooping cough, caused by Bordetella per
tussis. The pertussis toxin (also known as the lymphocytosis promoting
toxin) is not believed to be directly cytotoxic, but stimulates adenylate
cyclase by ribosylating regulatory proteins. It causes a variety of effects
depending on the cell type involved: insulin secretion, lymphocytosis, and
alteration of immune effector cells. Of the distractors: the filamentous hem
agglutinin (choice F) mediates attachment; the adenylate cyclase toxin
(choice B) stimulates local edema; the organism produces only a small zone
of hemolysis around its colonies, so choice C is not true; it is an aerobe and
does not grow anaerobically (choice D). All systemic manifestations of the
disease arise from the circulation of the toxins, not the organism itself
(choice A).
17. Answer: A. The causal agent is Streptococcus pneumoniae. It is a gram posi
tive coccus, which is alpha hemolytic and optochin sensitive, and it is the
most common cause of pneumonia in the elderly. It is the capsule of S.
pneumoniae which protects it against phagocytosis. That is why asplenic
individuals have a difficult time clearing infections with S. pneumoniae,
because a major antibody producing organ is missing and phagocytosis is
inhibited in organisms with capsules. Coagulase (choice C) is an anti
phagocytic attribute of Staphylococcus aureus. M protein (choice D) of
Streptococcus pyogenes is anti phagocytic. Catalase (choice B) breaks down
H2O2, and teichoic acids (choice E) mediate adherence. Neither protects
against phagocytosis.
18. Answer: B. The causal agent E. coli is gram negative, and the primary
means of developing septic shock with gram negative organisms is via lipo
polysaccharide (endotoxin).
19. Answer: C. The causal agent is Rickettsia rickettsiae; the disease is Rocky
Mountain spotted fever. The clues are North Carolina (located in the tick
belt of U.S.), rash that spreads from extremities to trunk, conjunctivitis, and
proteinuria. Rocky Mountain spotted fever is spread via a tick vector.
44
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
20. Answer: B. The causal agent is Bordetella pertussis. The clues are severe
cough, can’t catch breath, vomiting, incomplete vaccination history, con
junctival redness, and gram negative coccobacilli on Bordet Gengou medi
um. Pertussis toxin works by ADP ribosylation of Gi. ADP ribosylation of
elongation factor 2 (choice A) describes toxins found in Corynebacterium
diphtheriae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. ADP ribosylation of a GTP
binding protein (choice C) describes the toxins found in ETEC and Vibrio
cholerae. Blocks release of acetylcholine (choice D) describes the toxin
found in Clostridium botulinum. Blocks release of inhibitory transmitters
GABA and glycine (choice E) describes the toxin found in Clostridium tet
ani.
21. Answer: D. The diagnosis is infant botulism caused by Clostridium botuli
num. The clues are flaccid paralysis, constipation, difficulty breathing, tox
screen of stool, and age. The flaccid paralysis is due to a toxin that blocks
the release of acetylcholine. ADP ribosylation of eukaryotic elongation fac
tor 2 (eEF 2; choice A) describes toxins found in Corynebacterium diphthe
riae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. ADP ribosylation of Gi, an inhibitory
subunit of the G protein (choice B), describes Bordetella pertussis. ADP
ribosylation of GTP binding protein (choice C) describes the toxins found
in ETEC and Vibrio cholerae. Blocks release of inhibitory transmitters
GABA and glycine (choice E) describes the toxin found in Clostridium tet
ani.
22. Answer: C. The causal agent is Corynebacterium diphtheriae. The clues are
incomplete vaccination history and (dirty gray pseudomembrane which
causes bleeding when displaced). C. diphtheriae are gram positive rods, and
the toxin functions by inhibition of protein synthesis.
23. Answer: B. The causal agent is Streptococcus pyogenes. The clues: sore
throat, beta hemolytic, gram positive cocci. To answer this question, you
have to know that the agent is gram positive and that gram positive organ
isms have a thick peptidoglycan layer that protects them from osmotic
damage. Lipopolysaccharide (choice A) is found only on gram negative
organisms and is associated with shock. Phospholipids (choice C) are found
in the membranes of gram positive and gram negative organisms.
Polysaccharide (choice D) can be found on gram positive and gram nega
tive organisms. Teichoic acid (choice E) is only found on gram positives
and is used for attachment.
24. Answer: A. The disease is most likely Mycoplasma pneumonia caused by
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, which is non Gram staining and requires choles
terol for growth. Choice B, C. diphtheriae; choice C, Streptococcus pyogenes;
choice D, Staph aureus; choice E, Clostridium.
25. Answer: C. The causal agent is Listeria monocytogenes. The clues are neo
natal meningitis (age), gram positive rods. The only organism in the list
that is a gram positive rod is Listeria. Escherichia coli (choice A) is a gram
negative rod. Haemophilus influenzae (choice B) is a gram negative cocco
bacillus. Neisseria meningitidis (choice D) is a gram negative diplococcus.
Streptococcus agalactiae (choice E) is a gram positive coccus.
44
MICROBIOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
26. Answer: D. The causal agent is Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The clues are
coughing up blood, acid fast bacilli, and homeless. Sulfatides are sulfolipids
which hydrolyze to form sulfuric acid. The acidic pH of the M. tuberculosis
containing phagosome acts to stop lysosomal fusion. Cord factor (choice
A) is responsible for serpentine growth in vitro. Calcium dipicolinate
(choice B) is a component of endospores. Peptidoglycan (choice C) is a cell
wall component. Tuberculin (choice E) is a surface protein, which is not
involved in protection from phagosome lysosome fusion.
27. Answer: A. The causal agent is Gardnerella vaginalis. The clues are mal
odorous discharge, positive whiff test, thin gray discharge. Gram negative
diplococci in PMNs (choice B) is consistent with Neisseria gonorrhoeae.
Koilocytic cells (choice C) is consistent with human papilloma virus. Owl
eye inclusions (choice D) are consistent with cytomegalovirus. Tzanck
smears (choice E) are diagnostic for herpes simplex virus.
28. Answer: E. The causal agent is Bacillus anthracis. The clues are postal work
ers, hemoptysis and mediastinal widening. Elementary body and reticulate
body (choices A and D) are consistent with Chlamydia. Endotoxin and
periplasmic space (choices B and C) are consistent with gram negative
bacteria.
29. Answer: C. The clues are fist fight wound, gram negative rods with bleach
like odor.
30. Answer: A. The causal agent is Clostridium difficile. The clues are clindamy
cin, loose, mucoid, stools, yellow plaques. Clindamycin and other broad
spectrum antibiotics are associated with pseudomembranous colitis, as they
kill off the normal gut flora and C. difficile flourishes without competition.
31. Answer: A. The clues are elderly, catheter, gram positive cocci, catalase
negative, growth in 6.5% sodium chloride. Staphylococcus aureus and
Staphylococcus epidermidis (choices B and C) are catalase positive.
Streptococcus pyogenes and viridans streptococci (choices D and E) would
not grow in a high concentration of salt.
32. Answer: D. The clues are immunosuppressed (HIV+), necrotic lesion with
black center and erythematous margin (ecthyma gangrenosum). Bacillus
anthracis (choice A) is close because a black eschar can resemble ecthyma
gangrenosum, but it usually would appear at the point of contact (probably
not on the buttock). Clostridium perfringens, Enterococcus faecalis, and
Staphylococcus aureus (choices B, C, and E) do not fit the case description.
33. Answer: D. The causal agent is Helicobacter pylori. The clues are ulcer, ure
ase positive, gram negative curved rod. It is important to know all organ
isms that are associated with an increased risk of developing cancer.
34. Answer: D. The most likely causal agent here is a bacterium. Viral meningi
tis is usually mild and would not fit the CSF values. Both the age of the
patient and the petechial rash suggest it is most likely to be Neisseria menin
gitidis, which is a Gram negative diplococcus that is oxidase positive. The
overproduction of outer membrane fragments is what leads to the petechial
rash, even prior to antibiotic treatment.
44
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
35. Answer: D. This question is asking what carries the genetic code for diph
theria toxin, which must be some kind of DNA, which in turn means that
the protein eEF 2 can be immediately eliminated. The diphthamide on
eEF 2 is actually the substrate for the ADP ribosylation done by the diph
theria toxin. Genes expressing the diphtheria toxin originally enter C. diph
theriae as part of the DNA of the temperate corynephage. Integration of this
temperate phage results in a stable prophage, which directs the production
of the diphtheria toxin.
36. Answer: E. This hypothetical condition describes the mixing of one Hfr cell
with 100 F–recipients. Over time, with no cell division occurring, the one
Hfr cell would repeatedly conjugate with the F cells and transfer one
strand of its chromosomal DNA in sequence, beginning with oriT and the
oretically ending with the tra genes. The most frequently transferred bacte
rial genes also have the greatest likelihood of successful recombination; they
are those closest to oriT; in this example, the A allele. The entire chromo
some is so large that it is virtually never transferred in its entirety and thus,
the tra genes would not be transferred. (Even if tra genes were transferred,
oriT and tra genes have no homologous regions in the recipient cell chro
mosome and so would not successfully recombine within.) Thus, the recipi
ent cell acquires only new chromosomal alleles and NOT the whole fertility
factor and never changes phenotype to become an Hfr cell. Therefore, any
of the answers with cell one (the Hfr parent) as the dominant type would
be wrong.
The genes are transferred in linear order, so allele A will always be trans
ferred more frequently than any of the later genes.
Therefore, given sufficient time for conjugation, the cell type that would be
most numerous is that of the recipient genotype with a newly acquired
allele close to oriT. This means that the best answer is choice E: cell two
with a new A gene. The farther from oriT that the allele is, the less likely
that it will be successfully transferred. The distractor, choice C, with all 4
alleles transferred in, is less likely.
37. Answer: F. In transformation, free DNA from lysed cells is not protected
from the environment either by a cell or by a phage coat, but is instead
naked and therefore subject to nucleases.
38. Answer: F. The statement fits the definition of competency required for
transformation.
39. Answer: B. This is generalized transduction, but what are your clues? First,
it says “one phage” rather than all the phage in the cell (as for specialized).
Then it also says plasmid DNA could be picked up. For specialized trans
duction, only episomal plasmid DNA (incorporated into the bacterial chro
mosome near an attachment site) or chromosomal DNA could be picked
up. Finally, it mentions a lytic virus lifecycle. Lytic viruses are only capable
of generalized transduction.
40. Answer: A. Choice D is a definition of lysogeny but lysogenic conversion is
when lysogeny changes the characteristic of the lysogenized organism. In
medicine this usually means an increased pathogenicity from the process.
44
MICROBIOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
41. Answer: B. Choice A would require phage infection with a temperate cory
nephage. Choice C is most likely to take place through a conjugal transfer.
Choice D might occur by specialized transduction.
42. Answer: C. This is the classic description of a bacteriostatic agent.
43. Answer: E. The Kirby Bauer agar disk diffusion test is a means to compare
the functions of several antibiotics against one bacterial isolate. In a general
sense, bacteria will be inhibited from growing in close proximity to any disk
of antibiotic to which they are sensitive, so the larger the zone of inhibited
growth around the filter paper disk, the more sensitive the bacteria are to
that drug. Comparison between the disks cannot be accomplished without
the key which comes with the kit; however, since the company which pre
pared the kit has done the clinical trials which correlate the in vitro results
with those in human patients.
44. Answer: E. The disease is viral pharyngoconjunctivitis, caused by adenovi
rus, which is very commonly contracted through swimming pools.
(Adenovirus is a naked virus and chlorination of pools does not inactivate
it.) Hiking in a heavily wooded area (choice A) could be associated with a
vector borne disease, such as Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Eating under
cooked shellfish (choice B) could be associated with hepatitis A or Vibrio
parahaemolyticus, for example. Playing with toys in a day care center
(choice C) and traveling to a developing country (choice D) both could
begin the infection of a long list of agents.
45. Answer: A. The clues are lacy body rash preceded by a facial rash in a
school aged child with fever. HHV 6 (choice B) is the causal agent of roseo
la, which is fever, followed by a lacy body rash in infants. Measles (choice
C) is identified by cough, coryza, conjunctivitis with photophobia, Koplik
spots, and an exanthematous rash beginning below the ears then spreading
to the trunk and extremities. Rubella (choice D) is the causal agent of
German measles, which involves a rash beginning at the forehead and
spreading down.
46. Answer: C. The pol gene codes for reverse transcriptase, integrase, and pro
tease. Reverse transcriptase creates the provirus and integrase allows the
proviral DNA to be integrated, apparently at a random site, into a chromo
some in the host cell. Of the distractors, both choices A and B are accom
plished using the host cell’s RNA polymerase. Choice D is a function of the
gag gene, and choice E is controlled by tat and rev genes.
47. Answer: A. The presence of HBsAg, HBcAb, and HBeAg are all indicators
of an acute infection at 2 months postexposure. It is too early to identify a
chronic infection (choice B), but the presence of HBsAg after 6 months is
the main indication of a chronic infection. With a fulminant infection
(choice C), the patient’s symptoms are usually much more serious, likely a
superinfection with hepatitis D or the delta agent. If he were immune
(choice D), he would have had HBsAb in his serum. Since he has hepatitis
B viral antigens in his blood, (choice E) is wrong.
44
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
48. Answer: B. This patient has herpes simplex encephalitis, which typically
affects the temporal lobes. California encephalitis (choice A) affects older
children in the middle and northwestern U.S. The polio virus (choice C)
causes a flaccid paralysis with no sensory loss and does not occur in the
United States. St. Louis encephalitis (choice D) and the West Nile virus
(choice E) usually affect older individuals.
49. Answer: B. The clues are transplant patient with interstitial pneumonia;
CMV is the most common cause. Adenovirus (choice A) is associated with
conjunctivitis and acute respiratory disease in military recruits, among
other diseases. Although influenza (choice C) can cause pneumonia, there
is no mention of season, and CMV is still the most common cause in trans
plant patients. Respiratory syncytial virus (choice D) is usually seen in chil
dren (especially premature infants), and rhinovirus (choice E) causes the
common cold.
50. Answer: A. Polio is caused by the poliovirus. The clues are flaccid paralysis
and India, and polio is transmitted by the fecal oral route.
51. Answer: E. The only nucleic acid in the composite parental virus is the
RNA belonging to poliovirus. Thus, only poliovirus is made. The only role
the Coxsackie virus would play in the infection is to bind to the host cell
and stimulate the uptake of the composite virus. Once uncoating takes
place, the Coxsackie components play no further role. A perfect poliovirus
will have been made. The progeny will have the host cell range of polio
(choice A) because that is what they’ll be. There is no genetic material cod
ing for the Coxsackie components, so you cannot get a composite (choice
B). No capsid components of Coxsackie will be made; there can be no mix
ing (choice C). There was only one type of RNA; there can never be recom
bination (choice D). Sabin is a polio specific vaccine, and poliovirus will be
produced.
52. Answer: E. A common cause of gastroenteritis on cruise ships is the
Norovirus. Norovirus is a member of the Caliciviridae family and is a non
enveloped RNA virus. Acid fast oocysts (choice A) refer to persistent diar
rhea caused by Cryptosporidium parvum or Isospora belli, usually seen in
AIDS patients. Enveloped DNA and RNA viruses (choices B and C) cannot
be transmitted via the fecal oral route or live in the gastrointestinal tract
because of the instability of the envelope. A nonenveloped DNA virus
(choice D) would be consistent with adenoviral gastroenteritis, which is not
the most likely cause of cruise ship gastroenteritis.
53. Answer: B. Gp120 is the surface antigen of HIV that mediates its attach
ment to CD4 lymphocytes. Gp41 is a transmembrane glycoprotein, and
p24, p17, and nucleocapsid protein are all internal molecules, which would
rarely be accessible to the immune response.
54. Answer: E. This patient has rabies, which exhibits these neurologic symp
toms. In the eastern United States, the primary reservoir is raccoons.
45
MICROBIOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
55. Answer: E. The virus is HSV 2, a herpesvirus, which is a dsDNA virus that
uses the mechanisms of our own cells to transcribe an RNA strand from its
genomic DNA and use the transcribed RNA as a messenger RNA. Of the
distractors: (choice A) is the technique used by the negative sense RNA
viruses; (choice B) is used by the positive sense RNA viruses; (choice C) is
used by the retroviruses; (choice D) is used during the genomic duplication
of positive sense RNA viruses; (choice F) would not produce RNA; and
(choice G) is used in genomic replication by most DNA viruses.
56. Answer: C. The disease is mumps. The complication often seen in adult
males is orchitis, which can lead to sterility.
57. Answer: D. Cytomegalovirus, hepadnavirus, and poxvirus are all dsDNA
viruses and not RNA. Retrovirus is an RNA virus but replicates through a
dsDNA, so it also is not the correct answer. Toga is a positive RNA virus
that replicates through a negative RNA intermediate and has no DNA;
therefore, it’s the correct answer.
58. Answer: D. Both the symptomology, length of infection, and the epidemio
logical clues (college student, age 19, has given it to his girlfriend) strongly
suggest that this is EBV, which is a herpesvirus.
Choice A = parvo; choice B = adeno, papilloma, polyoma; choice C = pox;
choice D = herpes/hepadna because there’s no distinction as to circular
or partial dsDNA; choice E = reovirus; choice F = arena, bunya, and
orthomyxo; choice G = rabies; choice H = none; choice I = calici, hepe,
or picorna; choice J = flavi and toga; choice K = retro.
59. Answer: C. This describes the typical presentation of molluscum contagio
sum, which is commonly acquired through small breaks in the skin in envi
ronments where moisture keeps the virus viable (swimming pools, showers).
60. Answer: B. Cutaneous candidiasis is a problem in skin folds of obese indi
viduals. It is an even greater problem in diabetic patients because of the
high sugar levels. Only the members of the genus Candida would produce a
creamy surface growth. The erythematous base is due to the production of
a cytotoxin. Aspergillus, Epidermophyton, and Microsporum are all mono
morphic filamentous fungi and would not fit the description. Sporothrix is
found as cigar shaped budding yeasts but would not clinically present like
this. It is traumatically implanted to start subcutaneous infections.
61. Answer: E. The causal agent is Coccidioides immitis. The clues are
Southwest U.S., migrant worker (works outside), erythematous skin rash
(erythema nodosum). The diagnostic form of C. immitis in the sputum is a
spherule. Broad based budding yeast (choice A) describes Blastomyces
dermatitidis. Monomorphic encapsulated yeast (choice B) describes
Cryptococcus neoformans. Nonseptate hyphae with broad angles (choice C)
describes Mucor species. Septate hyphae dichotomously branching at acute
angles (choice D) describes Aspergillus fumigatus.
45
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
PART II | MICROBIOLOGY
Microbiology
62. Answer: C. The clues here are the geography, weight loss, granulomatous
inflammation, and macrophages engorged with oval structures (RES dis
ease). The colonial appearance and tuberculate spores strongly suggest the
causal agent to be Histoplasma capsulatum. Histoplasma is acquired from
dusty environments containing bird (most often chicken or starling) or bat
feces. The areas of highest endemicity are in the great central river beds
with bat caves, chicken coops, and starling roosts having extremely high
levels.
63. Answer: A. The clues are immunocompromised, myocardial infarction, and
septate acutely branching hyphae in nearly every tissue. Remember,
Aspergillus is extremely invasive in immunocompromised individuals.
64. Answer: D. The causal agent is Cryptococcus neoformans. The clues are
HIV, headache and blurred vision, encapsulated organisms in CSF. C. neo
formans is the number one cause of meningitis in AIDS patients. You
should know that it is monomorphic. “Spaghetti and meatballs” KOH
(choice A) describes Malassezia furfur. Branching septate hyphae (choice
B) describes Aspergillus. Mycelial form at room temperature and a yeast at
37.0 C (98.6 F) (choice C) describes all of the dimorphic fungi.
Nonencapsulated dimorphic yeast that reproduces by budding (choice E)
describes Blastomyces.
65. Answer: D. The clues are AIDS patient and atypical pneumonia.
Pneumocystis jirovecii is the hallmark atypical pneumonia of AIDS.
66. Answer: D. This child has the typical symptoms of hookworm disease,
caused in this country usually by Necator americanus. The infection is
acquired by penetration of the filariform larvae through the skin of the feet
or buttocks, after contamination of soil with the eggs of the agent deposited
in human feces. Of the other distractors, (choice A) would be most likely if
the infection were due to ascarids, pinworms, or whipworms. Choice C
would describe infection with either Taenia or Trichinella, and (choice E)
would be the means of infection with Plasmodium.
67. Answer: F. Leishmania spp. are transmitted by the bite of sandflies. They
cannot be transmitted from person to person by trivial means, so unless
organ transplantation is occurring in the barracks, direct human contact
(choice E) is not a possibility. To survive outside the human host, they must
be in the vector (sandfly), so transmission by food or water (choices A or
D) is not possible. Of the distractors that involve true vectors: Anopheles
mosquitoes (choice B) transmit malaria; reduviid bugs (choice C) transfer
American trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease); and tsetse flies (choice G)
transmit African trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness).
68. Answer: C. Giardia is common in mountain streams throughout the U.S.,
and the presentation of prolonged fatty diarrhea and weight loss is pathog
nomonic. It causes its pathology by its adherence to the mucosa of the
upper small intestine with its ventral sucking disc. No toxic metabolites or
lytic enzymes are involved in the pathology, which apparently results from
blockage of normal fat digestion. The organism is a flagellate, and thus has
flagella, but migration into extraintestinal sites is not a well known problem
associated with pathology. And although the organism does encyst as it
passes along the intestine, this is not known to produce symptoms.
45
MICROBIOLOGY PRACTICE QUESTIONS
69. Answer: C. The clues are Egypt, blood in urine, eggs with terminal spines,
working in rice field (indicates his possible exposure to contaminated
water). Also, be aware that in Africa, S. haematobium is associated with
bladder cancer. Entamoeba histolytica (choice A) would cause bloody stool,
not urine. Fasciolopsis buski (choice B) is the intestinal fluke; eggs do not
have terminal spines. S. japonicum and S. mansoni (choices D and E) are
intestinal schistosomes and would not cause blood in urine; the egg for S.
mansoni has a subterminal spine, whereas the egg for S. japonicum is fat
and oval with one tiny lateral spine.
70. Answer: D. The clues are frothy, yellow discharge, itching, organisms iden
tified on wet mount, bacterial cultures were negative. With Candida albi
cans (choice A), the discharge would have been white and creamy.
Trichophyton (choice B) causes skin, hair, and nail infections and is a cuta
neous fungus. Chlamydia trachomatis (choice C) would not be visible on
wet mount and causes intracellular infection of epithelial cells. Giardia lam
blia (choice E) is associated with diarrhea.
71. Answer: B. The clues are missionary, high fever, chills, Africa, multiple ring
structures, and crescent shaped gametes. Leishmania (choice A) produces
amastigotes inside phagocytic cells and causes either visceral, cutaneous, or
mucocutaneous pathology. Plasmodium malariae (choice C) clues might
include bar and band forms in RBCs, and 72 hour fever spikes. In P. ovale
and P. vivax (choices D and E) there will be Schüffner dots in RBCs.
72. Answer: D. The clues are perianal itching, irritability during the day, not
sleeping at night, eggs with flattened side, and Scotch tape test.
45

Index
Note: page numbers followed by f and t Adaptive immunity, 3–4 Allotype, antibody, 86, 87f
indicate illustrative and tabular material immune response, 5, 5f, 6f α hemolytic bacteria
respectively. innate immunity vs., 4t Streptococcus pneumoniae, 191
interaction with innate immunity, 6f viridans streptococci, 191, 192
T lymphocytes and, 52 Alpha toxin, 198, 384t
A
Adenovirus (Adenoviridae), 282t, Alphaviruses, 301, 302t
A B component toxins 286–287, 287f, 365t “Altered self,” tissue transplantation
diphtheria, 202 Adenylate cyclase toxin, 214 and, 123
Shigella spp., 227 Adherence, 174, 192 Alternative complement pathway, 27, 28f,
Abdominal pain, acute, 367t Adhesins, 174 34–35, 35f, 111t
ABO blood typing, 92, 94, 94f Adhesion and adhesion molecules Alveolar hydatid cyst disease, 355t
A B polypeptide neurotoxin, 197 in acute inflammatory response, 35–36 Amastigotes, 347, 347f, 348t
Abscesses and CD markers, 127t Amebae, 341t
in actinomycosis, 203 in extravasation process, 36, 36f free living, 344, 344t
Bacteroides fragilis, 234 and T lymphocyte activation, 57 Aminoglycosides, bacterial resistance to,
Klebsiella pneumoniae, 226 ADP ribosylation, of eEF 2, 211 263t, 264t
in nocardiosis, 204 Aerobes Amoxicillin or amoxicillin + clavulanate
Staphylococcus aureus, 187t bacterial identification algorithm, for Lyme disease, 237
Absidia infection, 339 396, 397 for Moraxella catarrhalis infection, 210
Acanthamoeba spp., 344, 344t obligate, 180t for Pasteurella multocida infection, 218
Accelerated acute graft rejection, 124, 125t Aeromonas spp., 228 Ampicillin, for Listeria monocytogenes
Acetylation, in plasmid mediated drug Afferent lymphatic vessels, 50, 50f, 51f infection, 201
resistance, 263t Affinity Anaerobes, 397
Acetylcholine receptor, in myasthenia avidity and, 72f bacterial identification algorithm,
gravis, 119t B lymphocytes and, 21 396, 397
Acid fast organisms and stain, 381, 390 IgM pentamer, 71 culture media for, 173t
Acinetobacter baumannii, 212 Affinity maturation, B cell activation facultative (See Facultative anaerobes)
Acne vulgaris, 358t and, 68 obligate, 180t
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome African eye worm (Loa loa), 350, 352t Anaphylatoxins, 34f
(AIDS), 309 African sleeping sickness, 348t Anaphylaxis, systemic, 101, 117t
CMV infection in, 292 Agammaglobulinemia, X linked, 110t Anaplasma phagocytophilum, 242, 242t,
conditions associated with, 310–311 Agar diffusion test, 266, 266t 243
dementia, 324t Agglutination Anatomic barriers, in innate immune
toxoplasmosis in, 349 Brucella, 216 system, 3, 6f, 28
See also Human immunodeficiency Coombs test, 92–93, 93f Ancylostoma braziliense, 350, 352t
virus (HIV) latex bead, 92 Ancylostoma caninum, 350, 352t
Actinomyces spp., 194t red blood cell, 92, 93f Anemia, 368t
Actinomyces israelii, 203 Streptococcus pneumoniae, 191 autoimmune hemolytic, 118, 119, 119t
Actinomycosis, 203 Albinism, 109t pernicious, 119t
Activation phase, in apoptosis, 80 Alcohol consumption phagocytic cell defects and, 109t
Active immunization, 100–104, 101t Klebsiella pneumoniae and, 226 Anergy
Acute abdominal pain, 367t Legionnaires disease and, 213 clonal, 21
Acute endocarditis, 361t Alcoholic rose garden sleeper disease, 330 peripheral tolerance and, 121
Acute glomerulonephritis (AGN), 188, Alemtuzumab, 126 Angioedema, hereditary, 111t
189t Allelic exclusion, cell receptor diversity Animal and human bites
Acute graft rejection, 124, 125t and, 19 infection from, 358t
Acute hemorrhagic cystitis, 287 Allergens, 117t organisms associated with, 219t
Acute inflammatory response, 35–37, 38f Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis Pasteurella multocida, 218, 250
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia, 18 (ABPA), 337 Ankylosing spondylitis, HLA allele in, 122t
Acute otitis media, 359t Allergic responses, type I hypersensitivity, Anogenital warts, human papilloma
Acute respiratory disease (ARD), 287 114–116, 117t virus, 285
Acute respiratory distress, 362t Allergic rhinitis, 117t Anthrax toxin, 195
Acyclovir, for herpes simplex virus, 289 Allogeneic grafts, 123, 124 Anti allotype antibodies, 101
45
IMMUNOLOGY AND MICROBIOLOGY
Antibiotic associated diarrhea, Antigen presenting cells (APCs) Arthropod vectors, for disease
Clostridium difficile and, 19 major histocompatibility complex and, transmission, 386–387
Antibiotics 52–53, 53t Arthus reaction, 120t
bacterial resistance to, 234, 264t–265t secondary lymphoid organs and, 49, 50f Artificial immunity and immunization,
(See also Drug resistance) Antigen receptors 100, 101t
mechanism of action, 170f, 170t diversity among, 16–20 Ascariasis, 351t
susceptibility testing, 266–267 of mature lymphocytes, 13–16, 13f Ascaris lumbricoides, 350, 351t
Antibody dependent cell mediated signaling, 25 Aspergillosis, 337
cytotoxicity (ADCC), 46, 83f See also B cell antigen receptor; T cell Aspergillus fumigatus, 337, 337f
antibody isotypes and, 76t receptor Assembly, in viral replication, 271f, 271t
IgG and, 73, 82 Antigen recognition molecules, Asthma, 117t
IgM and, 72 lymphocytes, 13–16, 87f Ataxia telangiectasia, 112t
in type III hypersensitivity, 118 Antigen(s) Atopic responses, in type I
Antibody( ies) bloodborne, 52 hypersensitivity, 114–116, 117t
affinity vs. avidity of, 68 bridging, 88 Atopy, 110t
anti RhD, 119 cross presentation, 56, 56f Attachment
autoantibodies, 118 dendritic cell associated, 49, 50f in apoptosis, 80
bacteria induced, tissue antigens and, 175 Enterobacteriaceae, 223 in viral replication, 271f, 271t, 272
B lymphocyte antigen receptor, 15 excess, in infection, 89–90 Attenuated vaccines, 102, 391
excess, in infection, 89–90 in fungal infection diagnosis, 327 Auramine rhodamine fluorescent stain,
in immune system, 4, 5 in humoral immunity, 71–73 205, 206
isotypes of, 76t, 86 hypersensitivity reactions to (See Autoantibodies, 118
labeled systems of, 94–97 Hypersensitivity diseases) Autografts (autologous grafts), 123, 124
linear deposits of, 119t labeled antibody systems for detecting, Autoimmune diseases, 113, 122
maternal, vaccinations and, 105 94–97 Autoimmune hemolytic anemia. See
monoclonal, 90, 90f, 126 thymus dependent, 65–66, 65f, 68 Hemolytic disease of the newborn
opsonization and, 39, 39f thymus independent, 65–66, 68 (HDNB)
polyclonal, 90, 90f tissue borne, 50 Autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura,
preformed, in graft rejection, 124 transportation to secondary lymphoid 119t
in primary and secondary responses, organs, 49, 50f Autoimmunity
71–76 See also Antigen–antibody interactions; mechanisms, 23
recirculation of, 58f Superantigens pathogenesis, 121–122
response by, in infectious disease, 89, 89f Antimicrobial agents Avidity
for syphilis diagnosis, 235 emerging bacterial resistance to, affinity and, 72f
in tissue graft rejection, 124 264t–265t (See also Drug decrease in, 68
tissue specific, type II hypersensitivity resistance) for IgM molecule, 71, 72
and, 118 peptidoglycan as target for, 169 Axial filaments, bacterial cell, 409t
See also Antigen–antibody interactions See also specific types, e.g.: Antibiotics Azithromycin + clarithromycin, for Lyme
Antibody mediated (type II) Anti RhD antibody, 119 disease, 237
hypersensitivity, 114t, 118–119, 119t Antiserum, monoclonal vs. polyclonal,
Antibody titers, 90, 91, 92f 90, 90f
B
Antigen–antibody interactions Antitoxin, trivalent (A B E), 198t
direct vs. indirect testing for, 91–92, Apicomplexa parasites, 341t, 349, 349t Babesia spp., 349t
91f–92f Aplastic crisis, B19 parvovirus, 284 Babesia microti, 349t
IgM and IgG, 85–88, 86f–88f Apoptosis Babesiosis, 349t, 387
monoclonal vs. polyclonal antiserum, cell receptor diversity and, 19 Bacille Calmette Guerin (BCG) vaccine, 206
90, 90f cytotoxic T cells and, 90 Bacilli
zone of equivalence, 89–90, 89f phases in, 80 gram negative, 182t, 211–234, 223f, 397
Antigenic drift, 175, 319 Arachidonic acid, 116, 117t gram positive, 181t, 194–210, 194t, 396
Antigenic shift, 319 Arboviruses, 272, 300, 301, 302t Bacillus spp., 194t
Antigenic specificity, 14 Arenaviridae, 313t, 321, 322t function and resistance mechanism, 171
Antigenic variation Arrest, in extravasation process, 36, 36f morphology/taxonomy, 381
as bacterial pathogenicity determinant, Arthritis, 119t pathogenicity, 194–195
383 gonorrhea and, 209, 210 Bacillus anthracis, 194–195, 381, 382
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 209 infection related, 372t Bacillus cereus, 195, 364t
Trypanosoma spp., 348t reactive (See Reactive arthritis) Bacitracin
Antigen presentation rheumatoid (See Rheumatoid arthritis) bacterial resistance mechanisms, 170t,
cross presentation, 56, 56f septic, 187t 190
endogenous pathway of MHC loading, Arthroconidia, 327, 327f effect of, on peptidoglycan synthesis,
54, 55f Arthropod borne viruses 170t
exogenous pathway of MHC loading, Flaviviridae, 300 Streptococcal bacteria and, 188
52–53, 54f taxonomic groups, 272 Bacteremia, 17
456
INDEX
Bacteria B cell defects, 111, 112t Bordetella pertussis, 214–215
aerobic (See Aerobes) B cells (B lymphocytes) as capsule producer, 381
anaerobic (See Anaerobes; Facultative in antigen presentation, 53t immunity against, 214
anaerobes) antigen recognition molecules, 17–18, vaccine, 107t
capsule producing, 381–382 18f Bordet Gengou media, 215
cell envelope of, 167, 168f in cell mediated immunity, 78 Borrelia burgdorferi, 236–237
drug resistance and (See Drug development/differentiation of, 21, 22f Borrelia hermsii, 237
resistance) and helper T cells, 66 Borrelia recurrentis, 237
epidemiology/transmission, 385–389 immune system function and, 5, 6f, 8 Bortezomib, 55t
genetic material of, 247–248, 383 immunodeficiencies involving, 76, 111 Botulinum toxin, 197
gene transfer mechanisms in, 248–261 lymphoid follicles and, 68 Botulism, 198t
gram staining reactions for, 181t–182t recirculation of, 65 Bradykinin induced vasodilation, 176
with human reservoirs, 385 B cell signal transduction complex, 15, Break bone fever, 301t
internal cell structures, 167, 168f, 409t 15f Bronchitis, 362t
laboratory diagnosis of, 390–391 Beef tapeworm, 355t Chlamydophila pneumoniae, 240t
mating types, 250f Belatacept, 126 Haemophilus influenzae, 217
microaerophilic, 180t Bell palsy, 370t Moraxella catarrhalis, 210
morphology/taxonomy, 381–382 Benzathine penicillin, in syphilis therapy, Bronchopneumonia, Moraxella
motile, 396, 398 236 catarrhalis, 210
nomenclature, 179 Beta chain, T cell, 15, 16t Brucella spp., 173t, 215–216
non motile, 396, 398 β corynephage, diphtheria toxin Brugia malayi, 352t
non spore forming, 396 and, 201 Bruton hypogammaglobulinemia, 110t
normal flora, 179, 180t β hemolytic bacteria Bubonic plague, 229
opsonization of, 39, 39f Listeria monocytogenes, 200 Bunyaviridae, 313t, 321, 321t
outer surface structures of, 409t Staphylococcus aureus, 185 Burkholderia cepacia, 212
oxygen requirements of, 180t Streptococcus agalactiae, 190 Burkitt lymphoma, 291
pathogenicity determinants for, 383–385 Streptococcus pyogenes, 188
spore forming, 381, 396 β lactamase, 210, 212
C
stains for, 181t β lactams
structure of, 167–170, 408t, 409t effect on peptidoglycan synthesis, 170t Calcifications, intracerebral, 389
unusual, 238–245 resistance to, 170t, 210, 212, 264t Calciviridae, 296t, 297–298
Bacteria induced antibodies, tissue Bile duct blockage, 367t Calcofluor white, 328t, 390
antigens and, 175 Bile soluble bacteria, 191 California encephalitis, 321t, 370t
Bacterial cell structures Binary fission, 172f Calymmatobacterium granulomatis. See
envelope, 408t Binding peptides, endoplasmic reticulum Klebsiella granulomatis
external, 409t and, 53 CAMP mnemonic, 224
internal, 409t Biofilm CAMP test, 190, 390
Bacterial infections, AIDS associated, 311 adherence mediated by, 192 Campylobacter spp., morphology of, 382
Bacterial structure, 167–170, 408t, 409t bacteria producing, 382 Campylobacter jejuni, 219–220, 366t
Bacterial vaccines, 107t partial adherence to, 174 Cancer
Bacterial vaginosis, 233 Bioterrorism or biowarfare agents AIDS associated, 311
Bacteriophages Bacillus anthracis, 194–195, 194t and Helicobacter pylori, 220
genome of, 248 Brucella, 215–216 Listeria monocytogenes infections and, 201
types of, 256, 256f Coxiella burnetii, 243 nasopharyngeal, 291
Bacteroides fragilis, 233–234 Francisella tularensis, 213–214 proteasome inhibitor therapy, 55, 55t
Band cells, 12t Yersinia pestis, 228–229 stomach, 220
Bare lymphocyte syndrome, 112t Bipolar staining, 382 Candida albicans, 337–338
Bartonella henselae, 219t BK polyomavirus, 286t pseudohyphae of, 326, 326f
Basophils Blackflies, 387 structures of, 338f
characteristics of, 11t Blastoconidia, 327, 327f Candidiasis
ontogeny of, 9f Blastomyces dermatitidis, 331, 334–335, AIDS associated, 310
in WBC differential, 12t 335f cutaneous/mucocutaneous, 329, 338
B cell activation Blindness, 210 Capnocytophaga canimorsus, 219t
affinity maturation and, 68 Blood, normal flora of, 180t Capsular vaccines, 103
isotype switching and, 68–69, 69f Bloodborne antigens, 52 Capsule, bacterial envelope, 408t
T cell dependent, steps in, 67f Blood cell changes, with infectious Capsule producing bacteria
by TD antigen, 65–66, 65f disease, 368t Klebsiella pneumoniae, 226
by TI antigen, 65–66, 65f B lymphocytes. See B cells Pasteurella multocida, 250
B cell antigen receptor, 13f, 14, 15 B19 parvovirus, 284 taxonomy of, 381–382
antibody isotypes and, 76t Bone marrow Carbuncles, 358t
specificity of, 19 graft versus host disease, 126 Carcinogen, Helicobacter pylori as, 220
T cell receptor vs., 16t lymphocyte development in, 8, 21 Carcinoma. See Cancer
45
IMMUNOLOGY AND MICROBIOLOGY
Cardiac symptoms, of infection, 361t macrophages/B cells and, 77–79 to IgE, 75
Cardiolipin, in syphilis diagnosis, 235 Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 205 to IgG, 73
Carditis, causative organisms algorithm, 373 NK cells and, 82, 82t Clavulanate. See Amoxicillin or
Carfilzomib, 55t overview, 77, 78f amoxicillin + clavulanate
Carriers, 121, 168 Cellular response, in innate immune Clindamycin, 233, 234
Caspases, cytotoxic T cells and, 80, 81f system, 29 Clonal anergy, 21
Catalase negative bacteria Cellulitis, 358t Clonal deletion, 21
chronic granulomatous disease and, 42 in nocardiosis, 204 Clonal expansion, in T cell activation, 57
Enterococcus spp., 193 Pasteurella multocida, 250 Clonal selection, in humoral immunity,
Gardnerella vaginitis, 233 Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 211 68
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 206 Cell wall Clonorchis sinensis, 354t
Streptococcus spp., 188 in bacterial envelope, 408t Clostridium spp., 194t, 196–200
Catalase positive bacteria inhibiting synthesis of, 264t function and resistance mechanism, 171
chronic granulomatous disease and, 42 See also Peptidoglycan morphology/taxonomy, 381
immunodeficiency disease and, 109t Central nervous system, infections of, Clostridium botulinum, 197, 198t
Staphylococcus spp., 185 369t–370t Clostridium difficile, 199, 366t
Cats, as Toxoplasma hosts, 349t Central tolerance, failure of, 113, 121 Clostridium perfringens, 198–199, 365t
Cavitary bronchopulmonary nocardiosis, Cephalosporins, 263t Clostridium septicum, 199
203, 204 Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) Clostridium tetani, 107t, 196, 197t
CCR5 co receptor, HIV and, 308f in Haemophilus influenzae infection, 217 Clue cells, Gardnerella, 233
CCR5 co receptor antagonist, 312t for meningitis diagnosis, 371t Coagulase
CCR5 gene, mutations in, 307t Cervicitis, 239, 363t Staphylococcus aureus, 185
CCR7 chemokine receptor, secondary Cestodes, 342t, 354, 355t Yersinia pestis, 228
lymphoid organs and, 49, 50f Chagas disease, 348t COBEDS mnemonic, 259, 383
CD3 signal transduction complex, 57 Chediak Higashi syndrome, 109t Cocci
CD4+ cells, 25 Chemoattractants differentiation, 185f
in acute graft rejection, 124 in extravasation process, 36, 36f gram negative, 182t, 208–210, 394–395
effector mechanisms and, 62 types of, 37t gram positive, 181t, 184–193, 394–395
HIV and, 309, 310, 310t, 368t Chemokines Coccidioides immitis, 331, 333–334, 333f,
in immunodeficiency diseases, 112t in acute inflammatory response, 37t 334f
in type IV hypersensitivity, 121t in extravasation process, 36, 37t Coccidioidomycosis, AIDS associated, 310
CD4 molecules for innate immunity, 43t Codominance
T cell activation and, 57, 60 Chickenpox, 290 class II molecules, 24
thymocyte expression, 25 Chikungunya virus, 301, 302t class I molecules, 24
CD8+ cells, 25 Chinese liver fluke, 354t in graft rejection, 124
in acute graft rejection, 124 Chlamydiaceae, 183t, 238–239, 238t Cold growth, Listeria monocytogenes, 200,
cytotoxic, 80, 81t (See also Cytotoxic T Chlamydia trachomatis, 239 201
lymphocytes [CTLs]) Chlamydophila pneumoniae, 240, 240t Cold sores, 289
in immunodeficiency disease, 112t Chlamydophila psittaci, 240, 240t Colitis, Clostridium difficile, 199
in type IV hypersensitivity, 121t Chloramphenicol resistance, 263t, 264t Collagenase, 384t
CD8 molecules Choleragen, 221 Colon, normal flora of, 180t
absence of, 37 Cholera toxin, 221 Colonization, 174
T cell activation and, 57, 60 Chorioretinitis, 360t Colorado tick fever, 387
thymocyte expression, 25 CHPFTCR mnemonic, 296n* Common cold, 359t
CD16 molecule, 82, 82t Chromosomes Common variable immunodeficiency,
CD18 molecule, 37, 109t bacterial, 247, 247f 110t, 112t
CD28 molecules, 57, 60 drug resistance related to, 262–263 Complement system, 34–35
CD40L deficiency, 110t Hfr, 254f alternative pathway, 27, 28f, 34–35, 35f,
CD56 molecules, 82t Chronic graft rejection, 125, 125t 111t
CD80 molecules, 57 Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD), classical pathway, 34, 74, 75f, 111t
CD86 molecules, 57 42, 109t, 211 deficiencies in, 111t
CD markers, 127t Chronic intestinal infections, type IV functions, 34f
Cefotaxime, 192 hypersensitivity and, 121t innate immunity and, 3, 6f, 34–35
Cefoxitin, 234 Ciprofloxacin, 195, 222 opsonization and, 39, 39f
Ceftriaxone, 192, 237 Cirrhosis, 367t regulatory proteins, deficiencies in, 111t
Celiac disease, 121t, 122t Clarithromycin + azithromycin, for Lyme split product C5a, in acute
Cell bound peptides, B cell receptor, disease, 237 inflammatory response, 37t
14–15 Classical complement pathway, 34, 74, type II hypersensitivity and, 118, 119t
Cell mediated immunity (CMI), 77–83 75f, 111t Component vaccines, 104, 107t
ADCC and, 82, 83f Class switching, in humoral immunity, Cone bug, 348t
cytotoxic T cells and, 79–80, 81f, 81t 73–76 Conidia, in fungal morphology, 327, 327f
leprosy, 208t to IgA, 73–74, 75f Conjugal crosses, 253f–255f, 25
458
INDEX
Conjugate vaccines, 103, 104f, 217 Cyclospora cayetanensis, 344t Dermatitis, contact, 121t
Conjugation Cysteine, 213, 390 Dermatophytes, 329–330, 329f
DNA transfer in, 250–251, 251f Cystic fibrosis, 212 Desert bumps, 333
drug resistance and, 262 Cystitis, 287, 363t Detachment, in apoptosis, 80
gene transfer in, 250–251 Cystoisospora spp., oocysts, 381 Diabetes mellitus
and transformation vs. transduction, 261t Cytochrome C oxidase, 208, 223 insulin dependent (type I), 121t, 122t
Conjunctivitis, 360t Cytokines insulin resistant (type II), 119t
Constant domains, immunoglobulin in acute inflammatory response, 35 Diarrhea
heavy chain, 20, 20f cytotoxic T cells and, 80, 81t Campylobacter jejuni, 219–220
Contact dermatitis, 121t of helper T cells, 64 Clostridium difficile, 199
Coombs test, 92–93, 93f in immune system responses, 5, 6f inflammatory, 366t
Cord factor, 205 in innate immunity, 43t by intoxication, 364t
Coronaviridae, 296t, 302–304 isotype switching and, 5, 68 microbial organisms causing, 364,
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID 19), in recombinant form, 131t 364t–366t
303–304 T cell activation and, 60 noninflammatory, 365t
Cortex, thymic, 22–23, 23f, 26f T cell proliferation and, 60 Shigella spp., 227
Corynebacterium spp., 194t types, 129t–131t Vibrio cholerae, 222
culture media for, 173t Cytolysins, 176, 177t Yersinia enterocolitica, 229
staining of, 382 Cytomegalic inclusion disease, 291 Diarrheal toxin, 195
Corynebacterium diphtheriae, 201–202 Cytomegalovirus (CMV), 291–292, 293t, DiGeorge syndrome, 112t
morphology/taxonomy, 381 311t Digestion, in phagocytosis, 38
as pigment producer, 382 Cytopathogenesis, viral, 382t Dilated cardiomyopathy, 361t
Cotrimoxazole, for Brucella infection, 216 Cytoplasmic inclusion bodies, 239 Dimorphic fungi, 326, 326f, 331–336
COVID 19 pandemic, 303–304 Cytoplasmic membrane, 167, 408t Diphillobothrium latum, 355t
Cowdry bodies, 382t Cytotoxic hypersensitivity diseases, 119t Diphtheria, 202
Coxiella burnetii, 243 Cytotoxicity, antibody dependent cell Diphtheria toxin, 202
Coxsackie A virus, 299t mediated. See Antibody dependent Diplococci
Coxsackie B virus, 299t cell mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) in gonorrhea diagnosis, 209, 210
Creutzfeldt Jakob disease, 323t Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), 25 morphology of, 382
Crohn disease, 121t in cell mediated immunity, 80, 81f, 81t Direct Coombs test, 92, 93f
Crosslinking, peptidoglycan, 169 development of, 64 Direct fluorescent antibody (DFA) test,
Cross matching blood, graft rejection killing mechanisms of, 80, 81f 94–95, 95f, 213, 215
and, 124 Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Cross presentation (cross priming), of (DIC), 176
D
antigens, 56, 56f Diversity
Cryptococcal capsular polysaccharide, 327 Daclizumab, 126 and adaptive immunity, 4
Cryptococcosis, AIDS associated, 310 Damage associated molecular patterns antigen receptor, 16–20
Cryptococcus neoformans, 327t, 338–339, (DAMPs), 3, 29 bacterial, 247–248
339f Dane particle, 278f gene transfer for, 248–252
morphology/taxonomy, 381 Dapsone, 209 immunoglobulin heavy chain, 20, 20f
prophylactic regimen for, 311t “Death domain,” cytotoxic T cells, 80 and innate immunity, 3
Cryptosporidium spp., 343t, 381 Debridement, wound, 199 DNA molecules
Cryptosporidium parvum, 343t, 365t Deerflies, 387 bacterial chromosome, 247
C3b complement, 39, 39f Defensins, 28, 40 bacteriophage, 248
CTLA 4 immunoregulatory molecule, 60 Defensive barriers, in innate immunity, 3, plasmid, 248
Cultures 6f, 28–29 DNA probes, for Escherichia coli
for diagnosing fungal infections, 327 Delayed type hypersensitivity (DTH), identification, 224
media for, 173t 114t, 120, 121t, 175 DNA viruses, 282–295, 406
Cutaneous anthrax, 195 Deletion characteristics, 282, 282t, 283f
Cutaneous larva migrans, 352t clonal, 21 See also specific viruses and families by
Cutaneous surfaces peripheral tolerance and, 121 name
diseases of, 358t Dementia, AIDS related, 324t Donor, transplant, 123
fungal infections, 329–330, 329f, 338 Dendritic cells Donor cell, for bacterial conjugation, 250,
normal flora, 180t in antigen processing/presentation, 53, 250f, 251
Cutaneous warts, human papilloma virus, 53t Donovanosis, 226
285 characteristics, 11t Double stranded RNA viruses, 322t
CXCR4 chemokine receptor, HIV and, innate immunity and, 29, 33, 33t Doxycycline
273t, 306t, 308f ontogeny of, 9f for Bacillus anthracis infection, 195
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate in secondary lymphoid tissue, 49, 51f for Brucella infection, 216
(cAMP) inducers, 177t Dengue virus, 300, 301t for Lyme disease, 237
Cyclospora spp., 365t Dental caries, Viridans streptococci and, 192 for Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 241
Cyclospora belli, 344t Dermacentor spp., 214, 241, 387 for Vibrio infection, 222
45
IMMUNOLOGY AND MICROBIOLOGY
Dracunculus medinensis, 350, 352t Eastern equine encephalitis virus, 301, Staphylococcus aureus, 186
Drug resistance 302t, 370t Enteroviruses, 298, 299t
Bacillus spp., 171 herpes simplex, 289t Envelope antigen (F 1), Yersinia pestis,
chromosome related, 262–263 LaCrosse, 321t 228
Clostridium spp., 171 St. Louis encephalitis virus, 300, 301t, Enveloped viruses
Enterococcus faecium/faecalis, 193 370t naked viruses vs., 273t
fungal, 340 subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, release, 274, 274f
intrinsic, 262 315, 324t env gene, 306t
mechanisms, 170t Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus, Environmental factors
methicillin resistant Staphylococcus 301, 302t autoimmune disease and, 122
aureus, 187 Western equine encephalitis virus, 301, in infection transmission, 389
multiple, 262–263, 263f 302t, 370t Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay
plasmid related, 262–263, 263t West Nile encephalitis virus, 300, 301t, (ELISA), 96, 96f
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 212 370t in Lyme disease diagnosis, 237
Staphylococcus aureus, 187 See also Meningoencephalitis in walking pneumonia diagnosis, 244
transfer, 262 Encephalopathy, HIV related, 310 Enzymes
vancomycin resistant bacteria, 187, 193 Endemic typhus, 240t extracellular, 384t
See also individual drugs and pathogens Endocarditis hydrolytic, 40
DTaP vaccine, 103, 107t, 215 acute, 361t lytic, 82
Duodenal ulcer, 220 Candida albicans, 338 See also specific enzymes by name
Dysentery, 364, 366t Coxiella burnetii, 243 Eosin methylene blue, 223
infective, 187t, 192 Eosinophils
E subacute, 193, 361t ADCC and, 82, 83f
Ear infections, 359t Endocervicitis, gonococcal, 210 characteristics, 11t
Endogenous pathway, of MHC loading, chemotactic factor A, in type I
Eastern equine encephalitis (EEE) virus,
54, 55f hypersensitivity, 117t
301, 302t, 370t
Endoplasmic reticulum, in MHC loading, in immune cell ontogeny, 9f
Ebola, 317–318
Ebola virus, 317–318 53, 54 in infectious disease, 368t
Echinococcus granulosus, 355t Endosomal pathway. See Exogenous in WBC differential, 12t
Echinococcus multilocularis, 355t pathway Epidemic typhus, 240t
Endospores Epidermophyton spp., 329
Echoviruses, 299t
in fungal morphology, 327, 327f Epiglottitis, H. influenzae disease of, 217
Ecthyma gangrenosum, 212
internal bacterial structure, 409t Epilepsy, 370t
Eczema, 112t
structure and function, 171, 171f Episomes, 248
Edema factor, anthrax toxin, 195
Endotoxin, 176 Epitope, antigenic, 71–72
Effector cells
Brucella spp., 216 Epstein Barr virus (EBV), 273t, 290–291,
in adaptive immunity, 5
Enterobacteriaceae, 223 293t
migration of, to infection site, 78, 79f
recirculation of, 58f Klebsiella pneumoniae, 226 Equivalence and equivalence zone
in secondary lymphoid organs, 57, 58f Legionella pneumophila, 213 in antigen antibody interactions, 89–90,
T cell differentiation and, 57 Neisseria meningitidis, 209 89f
Pasteurella multocida, 250 for hepatitis B, 280t
Effector mechanisms
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 211 Ergosterol, 325
cytotoxic T cell markers, 81t
Yersinia pestis, 228 Erythroblastosis fetalis. See Hemolytic
in graft rejection, 124
helper T cells and, 62–64, 63f Entamoeba histolytica, 343t, 366t disease of the newborn (HDNB)
Enteric fever, 231 Erythromycin, 202
in hypersensitivity diseases, 113, 114t
Enteric pathogens, culture media for, 173t Escherichia spp., 224, 225t
macrophages, 78t
Enterobacteriaceae, 223–234, 398 Escherichia coli, 224, 225t
NK cell markers and, 82t
Efferent lymphatic vessels, 50, 50f, 51f Enterobius vermicularis, 350, 351t as capsule producer, 382
Ehrlichia spp., 242, 242t Enterococcus faecalis, 193, 264t enterohemorrhagic, 365t
Ehrlichia chaffeensis, 242, 242t, 243 Enterococcus faecium, 193, 264t enteroinvasive, 366t
Ehrlichiosis, 240t Enterococcus spp., 193 enteropathogenic, 365t
Enterocolitis enterotoxigenic, 365t
Eikenella corrodens, 219t
Salmonella enterica subspp. other than Esculin hydrolysis, enterococcal bacteria
Elek test, 202, 202f, 390
Elephantiasis, 352t typhi, 232 and, 193
Shigella spp., 227 E selectins, 35–36, 36f
Ella mnemonic, 173
Yersinia enterocolitica, 229–230 Esophagitis, Candida albicans, 338
Embryogenesis, hematopoiesis during,
Enterohemorrhagic E. coli, 365t Ethambutol resistance, 264t
7, 7f
Emetic toxin, 195 Enteroinvasive E. coli, 366t Exanthem subitum, 292
Encephalitis, 370t Enteropathogenic E. coli, 365t Excision errors
California, 321t, 370t Enterotoxins lysogenic phage, 260, 260f
causative organisms algorithm, 321t, Clostridium perfringens, 198, 199 specialized transduction and, 260–261,
Escherichia coli, 365t 261
376, 376t
460
INDEX
Exocytosis, 38, 80 tick borne relapsing, 237, 387 superficial, 328, 329f
Exogenotes, 249, 250f typhoid, 231 systemic, 331–340
Exogenous pathway valley, 333–334 Fungal skin tests, 390
of antigen presentation, 54f yellow, 102, 300, 301t Fungal stains, 328t
of MHC loading, 52–53 See also Yellow fever Fungemia, 328
Exotoxins, 176, 177t F factors, in bacterial conjugation, 251, Fungus ball, 337
bacterial plasmid, 248 251f Fungus flu, 332–333
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 211 F+/F cells, in bacterial conjugation, 250, Furuncles, 358t
Extracellular enzymes, 384t 250f, 251, 253f Fusion inhibitors, in AIDS treatment,
Extravasation, steps in, 35–37, 36f Fibriae. See Pili and fimbriae 312t
Eye infections, 360t Fiery serpent (Dracunculus medinensis), Fusobacterium spp., 234
Eyelid infections, 360t 350, 352t
Filarial nematodes, 350, 352t G
F Filoviridae, 313t, 317–318
gag gene, 306t
Flagella and flagellates, 341t, 409t
Facultative anaerobes, 180t, 398 Ganglioside receptors, Clostridium tetani,
Flares, 117t
culture media for, 173, 173t 196
Flaviviridae, 296t, 300, 301t
Enterobacteriaceae, 223–234 Gardasil 9 vaccine, 104
Escherichia coli, 224 Fleas and flea bites, 228, 387 Gardnerella vaginalis, 233
Gardnerella vaginalis, 233 FLMPBAHBCSLC mnemonic, 389 Gas gangrene, 199
oxygen requirements of, 180t Floppy baby syndrome, 197 Gastritis
Flora, normal, 179, 180t
Pasteurella multocida, 250 Candida albicans, 338
Flow cytometric analysis, 97f
Proteus mirabilis and Proteus vulgaris, Helicobacter pylori, 220
Fluid (electrolyte) replacement therapy
230 Gastroenteritis
for Shigella infection, 227
Salmonella, 231 adenovirus, 287
for Vibrio infection, 222
Facultative intracellular and extracellular Bacillus cereus, 195
Flukes, 342t, 353, 353t–354t
organisms, 77, 385 Campylobacter, 220
Fluorescence activated cell sorting
Brucella spp., 215–216 Campylobacter spp., 219
culture media for, 173, 173t (FACS), 96–97 causative organisms algorithm, 377
Francisella tularensis, 213–214 Fluorescent antibody tests, 94–95, 95f Escherichia coli, 225t
Histoplasma capsulatum, 332 Fluoroquinolone resistance, 265t Norwalk virus, 298t
Folate inhibitor resistance, 265t
Klebsiella granulomatis, 226 Salmonella enterica subspp. other than
Follicles. See Lymphoid follicles
Legionella pneumophila, 213 typhi, 232
Follicular conjunctivitis, 239
Listeria monocytogenes, 200 Staphylococcus aureus, 187t
Food allergies, 117t
Yersinia pestis, 228 Gastrointestinal anthrax, 195
Food poisoning, Clostridium perfringens,
Failure of self tolerance, 113 Gastrointestinal infections and infectious
198–199
See also Autoimmune diseases diseases, 110t, 364, 364t–367t
Foreign antigens, hypersensitivity
Fasciola buski, 354t Gene products, MHC class I and II,
Fasciola hepatica, 354t reaction to. See Hypersensitivity 23–24, 23t, 24f–25f
Fas ligand (FasL), cytotoxic T cells and, diseases Generalized transduction, 256, 261t
80, 81f Formyl methionyl peptides, in acute Gene rearrangement, failures in, 20t
inflammatory response, 37t
Fatal familial insomnia, 323t Genetic probes, in gonorrhea diagnosis,
Four Sisters Ella of the Cysteine Chapel
Feedback mechanism, for immune 210
mnemonic, 390
responses, 5, 6f Genetics
Fragments, from proteolytic cleavage of
Fertility factor(s) bacterial, 247–248, 383
immunoglobulin, 88, 88f
conjugation, 250–251, 251f mobile genetic elements, 262
Francisella spp., 173t
integrated, 254, 254f–255f plasmids, 248
Francisella tularensis, 213–214
in site specific integration, 252 viral, 306t–307t
Fetus, immunoglobulin acquisition in, Free living amebae, 344, 344t Gene transfer, 250–251
105, 105f Fungal infections Genital elephantiasis, 363t
Fever AIDS associated, 310 Genital infections, HSV 2, 289
break bone, 301t antigen detection, 327 Genital lesions, 363t
classical pathogens, 331–336
Colorado tick, 387 Genitourinary tract infections, 363t
cutaneous, 329–330, 329f
cyclic/irregular, blood cell changes in, Genome
368t deep, opportunistic pathogens causing, bacterial chromosome, 247, 247f
337–340
enteric, 231 bacteriophage, 248
diagnostic methods, 327, 328t
paratyphoid, 231 Genomic nucleic acid, replication of, 273,
with drug resistance, 340
Pontiac, 213 273t
Q fever, 243 epidemiology and transmission, 388 Germinal centers, 68
rheumatic, 119t, 175, 188, 189t in immunodeficiency diseases, 111 Gerstmann Sträussler Scheinker disease,
Rocky Mountain spotted, 240t, 241, 387 morphology, 325–327, 325f–327f 323t
scarlet, 188, 189t nonsystemic, 328–331 Ghon complex, 205
subcutaneous, 330, 331f
Shigella spp., 227 Giardia lamblia, 343t, 365t
46
IMMUNOLOGY AND MICROBIOLOGY
Giemsa stain, 390 Gram variable bacteria, Gardnerella, 233 B cell contact with, 66
Gingival crevices, normal flora of, 180t Granules classification, 62
Gingivostomatitis, HSV 1, 289 Corynebacterium diphtheriae, 201 CTLA 4 expression on, 60
Glomerulonephritis internal bacterial structure, 409t cytokines produced by, 64
acute, 188, 189t Granulocyte colony stimulating factor differentiation of, 62–64
poststreptococcal, 120t, 175 (G CSF), 131t effector mechanisms and, 62
Glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase Granulocyte–macrophage colony subsets of, 62–64, 63f
(G6PD) deficiency, 109t stimulating factor (GM CSF), 131t in tuberculoid vs. lepromatous leprosy, 65
Glycopeptides, emerging bacterial Granulocytes, in innate immunity, 3, 6f Hematopoiesis, during development, 7, 7f
resistance to, 264t Granulomas Hemoflagellates, 347, 347f, 348t
Gonococcal infection, complement in Brucella infection, 216 Hemolytic bacteria
system and, 111t delayed hypersensitivity and, 175 α hemolysis, 191, 192
Gonorrhea, 209–210 organisms producing, 389 β hemolysis, 185, 188, 190, 200
Goodpasture syndrome, 119t, 122t subcutaneous, 358t Hemolytic disease of the newborn
gp120 protein, HIV and, 306f, 306t, 308f Granzymes (HDNB), 118, 119, 119t
Graft rejection ADCC and, 83f Hemorrhagic cystitis, acute, 287
ABO blood typing and, 94, 94f cytotoxic T cells and, 80, 81f Hepadnaviridae. See Adenovirus
mechanisms, 124 NK cells and, 82t (Adenoviridae)
monoclonal antibodies for prevention/ Graves disease, 118, 119t, 122t Heparin, in type I hypersensitivity, 117t
treatment, 126 Group A streptococci (GAS), 188–190, 189t Heparinase, 384t
types and tempo, 124–125, 125t Group B streptococci (GBS), 190 Heparnavirus, 298, 299t
Graft versus host disease, 126 Growth requirements, identifying disease Hepatitis (bacterial), Coxiella burnetii, 243
Gram negative bacteria, 167, 182t causing agents by, 390–391 Hepatitis A virus (HAV), 107t, 277t, 298t,
Bacteroides fragilis, 233–234 Guarnieri bodies, 382t 367t
Bordetella, 214–215 Guillain Barré syndrome (GBS), 121t, Hepatitis B virus (HBV), 277t, 367t
Brucella, 215–216 220, 320, 370t acute, 281f
Campylobacter, 219–220 Guinea worm (Dracunculus medinensis), antibody response to, 90
cocci, 394–395, 400 350, 352t chronic, 281f
Enterobacteriaceae, 223–234 Gulls wing morphology, 219, 382 replication of, 279f
Escherichia coli, 224, 225t serology for, 280t
Francisella, 213–214 terminology and markers for, 280t
H
Haemophilus, 216–217 vaccine for, 107t
Helicobacter, 220–221 HACEK group infections, 219, 361t Hepatitis C virus (HCV), 277t, 300, 367t
Klebsiella, 226 Haemophilus spp., 173t, 390 Hepatitis D virus (HDV), 277t
Neisseria, 208–210 Haemophilus ducreyi, 218 Hepatitis E virus (HEV), 277t, 367t
Pasteurella, 218 Haemophilus influenzae, 216–217 Hepatomegaly, Brucella infection and, 216
Proteus mirabilis/Proteus vulgaris, 230 as capsule producer, 381 Hepatosplenomegaly, 332
Pseudomonas, 211–212 growth requirements of, 173t Hepeviridae, 296t, 298
rods, 223f, 397 vaccine for, 103, 107t See also Hepatitis E virus (HEV)
Salmonella, 230–232 Hageman factor activation, 176 Hereditary angioedema, 111t
Shigella, 227 Hairy oral leukoplakia, 291 Herpes simplex encephalitis, 370t
Vibrio, 221–222 Hallucinations, with rabies, 316 Herpes simplex virus (HSV)
Yersinia, 228–229 Halophilic organisms, growth type 1, 289, 293t
Gram positive bacteria, 167, 181t, 184–208 requirements of, 390 type 2, 289, 293t
Actinomyces, 194t, 203 Hantavirus, 321, 321t Herpesviruses (Herpesviridae), 288, 288f,
Bacillus, 194–195, 194t Haplotypes, in graft rejection, 124 293t
Clostridium, 194t, 196–200 Haptens, type IV hypersensitivities to, 121 characteristics, 282t
cocci, 394–395, 400 Hapten specific B cell receptor, 104, 104f cytomegalovirus, 291–292, 293t
Corynebacterium, 194t, 201–202 Hashimoto thyroiditis, 121t Epstein Barr virus, 290–291, 293t
differentiation, 185f Hay fever, 117t HHV 6 and HHV 7, 292, 293t
Enterococcus, 193 Heat stable toxins, 176 HHV 8, 292, 293t
Listeria, 194t, 200–201 Heavy chain HSV 1 and HSV 2, 289, 293t
Mycobacterium, 194t, 204–208 B cell receptor, 16, 17f life cycle, 283f
Nocardia, 194t, 203–204 immunoglobulin, DNA of, 20, 20f varicella zoster virus, 290, 293t
rods, 194t, 381, 396 receptor diversity and, 19t Heterophile negative mononucleosis, 291
Staphylococcus, 185–187 secondary immune responses and, 86 Heterophile positive mononucleosis, 291
Streptococcus, 188–192 T cell receptor, 17, 17f Hfr cells, in bacterial conjugation, 250,
Gram staining organisms, 181t Heavy chain switching, IgM and, 69, 69f 250f, 251
gram negative, 182t Helicobacter pylori, 220–221 Hfr chromosome, 254f
gram positive, 181t Helper T cells (Th), 25 Hib vaccine, 103
non gram staining, 183t adaptive immune response and, 53 Highly active anti retroviral therapy
poorly visible, 183n*, 399 in antigen processing, 53 (HAART), 312
462
INDEX
Hilum, lymph movement and, 50 primary response for, 71–72 for innate immunity, 32–33, 32t, 33t
Hinge region, B lymphocyte antigen secondary response for, 73–76, 76t ontogeny of, 7–8, 7f, 9f
receptor, 14, 16t See also Antibody(ies) Immune complex mediated (type III)
Hippurate hydrolysis, Streptococcal “Hunting and gathering” nutrients, 174 hypersensitivity, 114t, 120, 120t
bacteria and, 190 Hyaluronic acid, Streptococcus pyogenes passive immunization and, 101
Histamine, in type I hypersensitivity, 117t and, 188 pathogenicity of, 175
Histoplasma capsulatum, 311t, 331–333, Hyaluronidase, 384t Immune mediated damage, pathogenicity
332f Hydatid cyst disease, 355t and, 175
Histoplasmosis, AIDS associated, 310 Hydrolytic enzymes, in intracellular Immune response
HLA linked immunologic diseases, 122t killing, 40 disease caused by, 113–122 (See also
Hodgkin lymphoma, 291 Hydrophobia, in rabies, 316 Hypersensitivity diseases)
Homologous recombination, 248, 249, Hyperacute graft rejection, 94, 124, 125t primary and secondary, 100f, 100t
250f Hyper IgM syndrome, X linked, 72, 110t type I hypersensitivity and, 114–116,
Hookworm, 352t Hyperimmune human globulin (TIG), 114t, 115f, 116f, 117t
Hormonal triggers, of autoimmune 196 type II hypersensitivity and, 114t,
failure, 122 Hyperimmunoglobulin E syndrome, 109t 118–119, 119t
Host, transplant, 123 Hypermutation, somatic. See Somatic type III hypersensitivity and, 114t, 120,
Host defense system, 174 hypermutation 120t
facultative intracellular parasites, 385 Hypersensitivity diseases type IV hypersensitivity and, 114t, 120,
obligate intracellular parasites, 384, 385 classification of, 113, 114t 121t
parasitic infections, 342 reactions common to, 113 Immune system
viral entry, 273 type I (immediate), 114, 114t, 115f, 116, adaptive immunity, 3–4, 4t
Human bites. See Animal and human 116f, 117t antibodies, 4, 5
bites type II (antibody mediated), 114t, cell origins, 7–8, 7f, 9f
Human development, hematopoiesis 118–119, 119t function, 4–5, 5f, 6f
during, 7, 7f type III (immune complex), 114t, 120, innate immunity, 3, 4t
Human herpesviruses 120t Immunity
HHV 6, 292 type IV (T cell mediated), 114t, 120, adaptive (See Adaptive immunity)
HHV 7, 292, 293t 121t, 175 autoimmunity (See Autoimmunity)
HHV 8, 292, 293t Hyperthyroidism, Graves disease, 119t cell mediated (See Cell mediated
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), Hyphae immunity [CMI])
305–312 of Candida albicans, 337, 338f humoral (See Humoral immunity
clinical stages of infection, 309f, 310t in fungal morphology, 325, 325f, 339f [HMI])
distinguishing characteristics of, 305 Hypogammaglobulinemia, 110t, 112t natural, 100
early symptomatic period, 310 Hypopigmentation, 328 types of, 101t
Haemophilus ducreyi, 218 Hypothyroidism Immunization, 99–107
laboratory analysis for, 96, 96f, 311t Graves disease and, 119t Bordetella pertussis, 326
life cycle for, 308f Hashimoto thyroiditis, 121t goals of, active vs. passive, 100
mutations associated with, 307t recommended schedules, 106, 106t
and Mycobacterium avium types, 100–101
I
intracellulare, 207, 207t See also Vaccines
and Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 206, Idiotypes, antibody, 86 Immunoassay, for Escherichia coli
207 and antigen recognition, 14, 21 identification, 224
prophylactic regimens for, 311t and receptor diversity, 16–17 Immunocompromised patients
receptors of, 273t IL 2 cytokine, 80 CMV infection in, 291
regulatory genes, 307t IL 4 cytokine, 63–64, 63f Klebsiella pneumoniae and, 226
structure/structural genes, 306f, IL 5 cytokine, 63f, 64 Listeria monocytogenes and, 200, 201
306t–307t IL 8 cytokine, 36, 36f, 37t live viral vaccine contraindications in,
treatment and prevention of, 312, 312t IL 10 cytokine, 63f, 64 102
See also Acquired immunodeficiency IL 12 cytokine, 43t, 63, 63f Immunodeficiency diseases
syndrome (AIDS) IL 13 cytokine, 63f, 64 characteristics, 109
Human leukocyte antigens (HLA), 23, IL 15 cytokine, 43t complement deficiencies, 111t
23t, 122t IL 17 cytokine, 63f, 64 humoral immunity defects, 110t
Human metapneumovirus (hMNV), 316t IL 18 cytokine, 43t involving B lymphocytes, 76, 111,
Human papilloma virus (HPV), 107t, IL 22 cytokine, 63f, 64 112t
284–285 Immediate (type I) hypersensitivity, 114, involving T lymphocytes, 111, 112t
Human T cell leukemia, 305 114t phagocytic cell defects, 109t
Human T cell lymphotropic virus development of, 115f with severe combined
(HTLV), 305 late phase reaction in, 116 immunodeficiencies, 112t
Humoral immunity (HMI), 71–76 mediators of, 116f, 117t Immunodiagnostics, 85–97
defects in, 110t Immune cells, 8–11 Immunogens, 100
Ig effector function in, 73 antigen recognition molecules of, 13–16 See also Antigen(s)
46
IMMUNOLOGY AND MICROBIOLOGY
Immunoglobulin A (IgA) Immunosuppression systemic, 41, 41f
biologic functions, 76t for acute graft rejection prevention, 124 type II hypersensitivity and, 119t
class switching to, 73–74 Legionella pneumophila and, 213 type IV hypersensitivity and, 121t
deficiency, 112t Immunotherapy, risks associated with Inflammatory bowel disease, 122t
as dimer, 73, 74f passive, 101 Inflammatory diarrhea, 366t
in fetuses and neonates, 105, 105f Impetigo, 358t Influenza, 320
memory B cells, 74 Group A streptococci, 188, 189t Influenza like symptoms
passive immunization, 101 Staphylococcus aureus, 187t Anaplasma phagocytophilum infection
proteases, 174, 209, 217, 384t Inactivated vaccines, 107t, 391 and, 242t, 243
secondary immune responses and, Inclusion conjunctivitis, 239 B19 parvovirus infection and, 284
73–74 Inclusion disease, cytomegalic, 291 Brucella infection and, 216
secretory, 74, 75f India ink wet mount, 390 with Ebola, 317
Immunoglobulin cellular adhesion Indirect Coombs test, 93, 93f Ehrlichia chaffeensis infection and, 242t,
molecules (Ig CAMs), 36, 36f Indirect fluorescent antibody test (IFA), 243
Immunoglobulin D (IgD) 95, 95f Leptospira infection and, 237
B cell receptor, 13–14, 16t Induction process, in transduction, 259, with rabies, 316
biologic functions, 76t 260f Rickettsia rickettsii infection and, 241
Immunoglobulin E (IgE) Infection Influenza virus, 107t, 319–320
biologic functions, 76t antibody response in, 89–90, 89f Inhalation, transmission via, 388
class switching to, 75, 75f arthritis related to, 372t Innate cellular response, 29, 44–46
immunodeficiency diseases and, 112t case histories in, 432–442 Innate immune receptors, 31, 31t
passive immunization, 101 of central nervous system, 369t–370t Innate immunity, 3, 27
production deficiency, 112t crossing placenta, 388 adaptive immunity vs., 4t
type I hypersensitivity and, 114, 115f epidemiology/transmission, 385–389 barriers for, 3, 6f, 28–29
Immunoglobulin G (IgG) granulomatous response to, 389 cells involved in, 32–33, 32t, 33t
ADCC and, 82 intracerebral calcifications caused by, immune response, 5, 5f, 6f, 31t
basic structure, 73f 389 interaction with adaptive immunity, 6f
biologic functions, 76t laboratory diagnosis, 390–391 pathogen clearance via, 27f
class switching to, 73 mechanisms, 174–176 and pathogen entry sites, 28f
in fetus and neonate, 105, 105f osteomyelitis and, 372t Insect disease vectors, 386–387
opsonization with, 39, 39f treatment/prevention, 391–392 Insomnia, fatal familial, 323t
in secondary immune responses, See also specific infectious disease and/or Insulin dependent diabetes mellitus
85, 86f pathogen (type I), 112t, 122t
type II hypersensitivity and, 114t, 119 Infectious disease Insulin resistant diabetes (type II), 119t
Immunoglobulin M (IgM) abbreviations used in, 357 Integrase inhibitor, in AIDS treatment,
B cell receptor, 13–14, 16t antibody response in, 89–90, 89f 312t
biologic functions of, 76t blood cell changes in, 368t Integrated fertility factor, 254, 254f–255f
humoral immunity defects, 110t cardiac symptoms, 361t Integrins
isotype switching and, 69, 69f case histories, 432–442 in extravasation process, 36, 36f
in neonates, 105, 105f diarrhea, 364, 365t–366t leukocyte adhesion deficiency and, 37
pentamer, 71–72, 71f of ear, nose, throat, and upper Integrons. See Transposons
in primary immune responses, 85, 86f respiratory system, 359t Interferon(s)
type II hypersensitivity and, 114t of eyes, 360t as physiologic barriers, 29
Immunoglobulin(s) of gastrointestinal tract, 367t production of, 44, 44f
acquisition, in fetus and neonate, 105, of genitourinary tract, 363t therapeutic use of, 45
105f of liver, 367t Interferon α (IFN α), 130t
antigen receptors, 13–14, 16t of middle and lower respiratory system, innate immunity and, 29, 43t, 44
class switching for, 73–75 362t recombinant form, 131t
heavy chain, 20, 20f rashes in, 371t therapeutic use, 45
proteolytic cleavage of, papain vs. self study charts, 358–379 Interferon β (IFN β), 130t
pepsin, 88, 88f of skin, mucous membranes, and innate immunity and, 29, 43t, 44
Immunologic diseases, HLA linked, 122t underlying tissues, 358t recombinant form, 131t
See also Hypersensitivity diseases See also specific infectious disease and/or therapeutic use, 45
Immunologic memory pathogen Interferon γ (IFN γ), 130t
absence, 66 Infective endocarditis, 187t, 192 in cell mediated immunity, 77, 79, 80
in adaptive immunity, 4 Infectivity mechanisms, 174–176 helper T cell differentiation and, 63, 63f
generation, 45 Inflammasome, 29, 30f recombinant form, 131t
in innate immunity, 3 Inflammation therapeutic use, 45
TD antigen and, 66 acute response, 35–36, 36f Interleukins
TI antigen and, 66 immunologic diseases and, 114t classifying, 129t–130t
Immunoprophylaxis, active immunization innate immunity and, 3, 29, 30f, 41 IL 2, 80
for, 102–104 pathogenicity and, 175 IL 4, 63–64, 63
464
INDEX
IL 5, 63f, 64 Killer activating receptor (KAR), 45–46, Leukotrienes
IL 8, 36, 36f, 37t 46f in acute inflammatory response, 37t
IL 10, 63f, 64 Killer inhibiting receptor (KIR), 45–46, in type I hypersensitivity, 117t
IL 12, 43t, 63, 63f 46f Lice, 386
IL 13, 63f, 64 Kinases, 384t Life cycles, of parasites, 342
IL 15, 43t Kinyoun stain, 181t Light chain
IL 17, 63f, 64 Kirby Bauer agar disk diffusion test, 266, of B cell receptor, 17–18, 18f
IL 18, 43t 266t receptor diversity and, 19t
IL 22, 63f, 64 Kissing bug, 348t, 386 variable domain amino acids, 17, 18f
Internal organs, normal flora of, 180t Kissing disease, 291 Limited diversity, in innate immunity, 3
Interstitial pneumonia, 292, 340 Klebsiella granulomatis, 226 Limited specificity, in innate immunity, 3
Intoxication, diarrhea by, 364t Klebsiella pneumoniae, 226, 381 Lincosamides, emerging bacterial
Intracellular killing, 40, 40f KOH wet mount, 328, 328t, 330, 338 resistance to, 264t
in chronic granulomatous disease, 42 Kuru, 323t Lipid A, 167
by phagocytic cells, 175 Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 167, 176
Intracellular pathogens See also Endotoxin
L
facultative, 77 Listeria spp., 194t
obligate (See Obligate intracellular Labeled antibody systems, 94–97 Listeria monocytogenes, 200–201
parasites and pathogens) LaCrosse encephalitis, 321t Listeriolysin O, 200
Intracellular survival, 175 Lactoferrin, in intracellular killing, 40 Listeriosis, 201
Intracerebral calcifications, 389 Lactose fermenters, 223, 226, 398 Liver, infectious disease of, 367t
Intrauterine device infection, 203 Lag phase, in bacterial growth and death, Live vaccines, 102–103, 107t, 392
Intrinsic defenses, in innate immunity, 3 172, 172f Loa loa, 350, 352t
Intrinsic drug resistance, 262 Lambda phage, 258–259, 259f Log phase, in bacterial growth and death,
Invariant chain (Ii), synthesis of, 53 λ constant domain, light chain, 18 172, 172f
Invasins, pathogenicity and, 175 Larva migrans Lowenstein Jensen medium, 205, 206
Invasive aspergillosis, 337 cutaneous, 352t Lower respiratory tract infection, 362t
Invasive factors, bacterial pathogenicity visceral, 351t L selectins, 127t
and, 383t Lassa fever virus, 321, 322t LTR (U3, U5) gene, 307t
“Iraqibacter”, 212 Late phase reaction, in type I Lyme disease, 236–237, 236f, 387
Iron, in Legionella pneumophila culture, hypersensitivity, 116 Lymph, in secondary lymphoid tissue,
213 Latex bead agglutination tests, 92 50, 51f
Isografts (syngeneic grafts), 123, 124 Latex particle agglutination (LPA) test, 327 Lymphadenitis
Isoniazid, 206, 264t Lecithinase, 198, 384t mediastinal hemorrhagic, 195
Isospora belli, 365t Lectin binding pathway, 34 Pasteurella multocida, 250
Isotypes Legionella spp. Lymph nodes
antibody, 76t, 86 culture media for, 173t compartmentalization in, 51f
antigen recognition molecule, 14 growth requirements, 173t Salmonella and, 231
biologic functions in humoral Legionella pneumophila, 213, 388, 389 structure of, 50
immunity, 76t Legionnaires disease, 213 Lymphoblastic leukemia, acute, 18
one way switching, 68 Leishmania spp., 348t Lymphocytes
switching, B cell activation and, 68–69, Leishmania braziliensis, 348t in adaptive immune response,
69f Leishmania donovani, 348t 3–4, 6f
Ixodes pacificus, 236 Leishmanias, 347, 347f, 348t antigen recognition molecules and,
Ixodes scapularis, 236 Lentivirus group, 305 13–16, 13f
See also Human immunodeficiency characteristics of, 10t
virus (HIV) in infectious disease, 368t
J
Lepromatous leprosy, 65 ontogeny of, 9f
Jarisch Herxheimer reaction, 236, 237 Lepromin skin test, 208t, 390 recirculation of, 49
J chain, 71, 71f Leprosy, 65, 207–208, 208t in secondary lymphoid tissue, 52, 52f
JC polyomavirus, 286t Leptospira interrogans, 237–238 selection and differentiation of, 21–26
Job syndrome, 109t Leptospirosis, 237–238 self reactive, 21
Lethal factor, anthrax toxin, 195 in WBC differential, 12t
Leukemia See also B cells; T cells
K
acute lymphoblastic, 18 Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
Kaposi sarcoma, 292 human T cell, 305 (LCMV), 321, 322t
κ constant domain, light chain production Leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD), Lymphocytosis, 368t
and, 18 37, 109t Lymphogranuloma venereum, 239
Keratinized tissues, superficial fungal Leukocytes, mononuclear, 368t Lymphoid cells
infection of, 328, 329f Leukoencephalopathy, progressive characteristics of, 10t
Keratoconjunctivitis, HSV 1, 289 multifocal, 324t in immune cell ontogeny, 9f
Killed vaccines, 102–103, 107t Leukorrhea, 209 in immune system function, 8
46
IMMUNOLOGY AND MICROBIOLOGY
Lymphoid follicles, 50, 52 in endosomal (exogenous) pathway of Meningococcal infection, complement
B cells and, 68 antigen processing, 52–53, 54f system deficiency and, 111t
in spleen, 52 gene products, 23, 23t, 24, 25f Meningococcal meningitis, 209
Lymphoid organs graft rejection and, 124 Meningococcemia, 209
primary, 21, 22 MHC–peptide complex of T cell Meningoencephalitis, 369t
secondary (See Secondary lymphoid receptor, 61 Ebola virus, 317
organs) thymocyte exposure to, 23 HSV 1, 289
Lymphoproliferative disease, 291 Malaria, 346, 346t mumps virus, 315
Lysis Malassezia furfur, 328, 329f MERS CoV (Middle Eastern respiratory
ADCC and, 82 Malignant otitis externa, 359t syndrome), 304
in complement system, 34 Malignant pustules, 358t Metabolic stimulation, within phagocytes,
Lysogenic conversion, 248, 259 Maltese cross sign, 349t 40, 40f
excision error, 260, 260f Mannitol, Staphylococcus aureus and, 185 Metachromatic staining, 382
normal excision in, 260f Mannose binding pathway (MBP), 34 Metazoans, 341t, 342t, 350–354
specialized transduction and, 260–261, Mantoux test, 206, 291 Methicillin resistant Staphylococcus
261f Marburg virus, 317 aureus (MRSA), 187, 264t
Lysogeny, 201, 258–259, 259f Mass lesions, central nervous system, 370t Metronidazole, 196
Lysozyme, 28, 40 Mast cells for bacterial vaginosis, 233
Lytic enzymes, ADCC and, 82 characteristics of, 11t Bacteroides fragilis and, 234
Lytic viruses granule release from, 76t Clostridium difficile and, 199
life cycle of, 257f in immunologic diseases, 114–116, Microaerophilic bacteria, 180t
transduction and, 256, 257f 114t, 115f–116f, 117t Microbial infections, diarrhea caused by,
innate immunity and, 33, 33t 364, 364t–366t
M ontogeny of, 9f Microorganisms, culture of, 173, 173t
Mast cells mediators, in type I Microscopic methods, of diagnosing
MacConkey screen, 223, 224, 226
hypersensitivity, 117t fungal infections, 328t
Macrolide resistance, 264t
Mastitis, 187t Microsporidia spp., 344t, 365t
Macromolecular synthesis, in viral
replication, 271f, 271t Maternal antibodies, vaccinations Microsporum spp., 329
Macrophages and, 105 Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome
activation pathways for, 32t M cells (MERS), 304
Salmonella and, 231 Middle respiratory tract infection, 362t
ADCC and, 82, 83f
Shigella and, 227 Midges, 387
amastigotes in, 347, 348t
Measles SSPE, 324t Minimal bactericidal concentration
in antigen presentation, 53t
Measles vaccine, 107t (MBC), 267, 267f
in autoimmune disease, 122
Measles virus, 314–315, 324t Minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC),
in cell mediated immunity, 77–80 78t
Mediastinal hemorrhagic lymphadenitis, 266, 267f
characteristics of, 11t
195 Mites, 387
collaboration of NK cells and, 33f
innate immunity and, 29, 32, 32t Medulla, thymic, 22, 23f, 26f Mitogens, B cell, 66
ontogeny of, 9f Medullary sinus, 50 Mobile genetic elements, multiple drug
Salmonella typhi and, 231 Melanoma, CTLA 4 regulation and, 60 resistance plasmids and, 262
Membrane bound immunoglobulin, Molecules, chemoattractive, 37t
in secondary lymphoid tissue, 51f, 52,
B cell receptor and, 14, 14f Molluscum contagiosum, 294
52f
Membrane pore formation, 34 Monkeypox, 293
T helper cells and, 78–80 79f
Memory, immunologic. See Immunologic Monoclonal antibodies
in type II hypersensitivity reactions,
memory clinical applications for, 126
118, 119t
Memory cells polyclonal antibodies vs., 90, 90f
in type IV hypersensitivity reactions,
B cell receptor, antibody isotypes and, Monocytes
114t, 120
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) 76t characteristics of, 11t
class I homing, 74 in infectious disease, 368t
APCs and, 54 and immunologic memory, 99, 100f innate immunity and, 29, 32, 32t
cytotoxic T cell differentiation, 80 recirculation of, 58f ontogeny of, 9f
T cell activation and, 57 in WBC differential, 12t
deficiency in, 111, 112t
Meningitis, 369t Mononucleosis, 291
endogenous pathway of antigen
processing, 54, 55f causative organisms algorithm, 375 Moraxella catarrhalis, 210
cerebrospinal fluid findings with, 371t Morulae, 242, 242t
gene products, 23, 23t, 24, 24f
Cryptococcus neoformans, 338 Mosquitoes, 386
graft rejection and, 124
Escherichia coli, 225t Motile bacteria, 230, 396, 398
in NK cell killing, 81t
thymocyte exposure to, 23 Haemophilus influenzae, 217 M protein, Streptococcus pyogenes and,
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) Listeria monocytogenes, 200, 201 188
class II meningococcal, 209 mRNA molecules, variable domain
APCs and, 52, 53, 53t neonatal, 190 sequence, 17
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 191 Mucinase, Helicobacter pylori and, 22
deficiency in, 111, 112t
466
INDEX
Mucor spp., 339 Nagler reaction, 198 Newborn, hemolytic disease of (HDNB),
Mucosal associated lymphoid tissues Naive B cell receptor, antibody isotypes 118, 119, 119t
(MALT), 74 and, 76t Nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) reduction
Mucous membranes, infectious diseases Naive B cells, 65, 69 test, 42
of, 358t Naive T cells, 49, 52, 79 N nucleotide addition, for light chains,
Multiple drug resistance (MDR) Naked viruses 18, 19t
plasmids, 262–263, 263f enveloped viruses vs., 273t Nocardia spp., 194t, 381
Multiple sclerosis, 121t, 122t release of, 274, 274f Nocardia asteroides, 203–204
Multipotent stem cells, 7–8 Nasopharyngeal carcinoma, 291 Nocardia brasiliensis, 203–204
Mumps virus, 107t, 315 Natural immunity, 100, 101t Nocardiosis, 203–204
Muromonab, 126 Natural killer (NK) cells NOD like receptors (NLR), 31t
Muscle weakness, type II hypersensitivity activation of, 46f Non attenuated vaccine, 102
and, 119t ADCC and, 82, 83f Non contagious infections, 388
Mutagenesis and mutations in cell mediated immunity, 45–46, 82, Non cytotoxic hypersensitivity diseases,
in HIV regulatory genes, 263 82t 119t
in innate immune receptors, 31 characteristics of, 10t Nongonococcal urethritis, 239
multiple drug resistance plasmids and, in immune system function, 8, 82, 82t Non gram staining bacteria, 183t
263 innate immunity and, 33, 33t Non Hodgkin lymphoma, 291
Myasthenia gravis, 118, 119t macrophage collaboration with, 33f Noninflammatory diarrhea, 365t
Mycelium, fungal, 326 ontogeny of, 9f Non lactose fermenters, 398
Mycetoma, 358t Necator americanus, 350, 352t Enterobacteriaceae, 223
in ctinomyces israelii infection, 203 nef gene, 307t, 308f Salmonella, 231, 232
in Nocardia infection, 203 Negative selection, T cell receptor Shigella, 227
Mycobacteria other than tuberculosis signaling, 25 Non motile bacteria, 396, 398
(MOTTS), 207, 207t Negative stranded RNA viruses, 313–322, Non nucleoside analogs, 312t
Mycobacterium spp., 204–208 313t Non self peptides, cytotoxic T cells, 80
characteristics of, 194t Negri bodies, 382t Nonseptate hyphae, 325, 325f, 339f
culture media for, 173t Neisseria spp., 208–210, 208t, 395 Non spore forming bacteria, 396
morphology/taxonomy, 381 culture media for, 173t Nonsupperative sequelae, in Group A
Mycobacterium avium intracellulare, 207t morphology of, 382 Streptococcal infections, 189t
in HIV infection, prophylactic regimen, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 208t, 209–210 Nontransducting phage, in induction
311t drug resistance of, 264t, 265t process, 259–260, 260f
transmission of, 388, 389 vaccine for, 103 Normal flora, 179, 180t
Mycobacterium kansasii, 207t Neisseria meningitidis, 208–209, 208t Norwalk virus, 298, 365t
Mycobacterium leprae, 65, 207–208 as capsule producer, 381 Nose, normal flora of, 180t
Mycobacterium marinum, 207t vaccine for, 107t Nosocomial infections, Klebsiella
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 205–207 Nematodes, 342t, 350, 351t–352t pneumoniae, 226
Mycobacterium ulcerans, 207t Neonatal disease Nucleic acids
Mycolic acids, 204 Chlamydia trachomatis infection, 239 genomic, replication, 262–263
Mycology, 325 Escherichia coli infection, 225t synthesis inhibitors, 265t
Mycoplasma spp., growth requirements, HSV 2 infection, 289 Nucleoside analogs, 312t
173t, 391 Listeria monocytogenes infection, 200, 201 Nymphs, tick, 236
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, 243–244 meningitis, 190
Mycoplasmataceae, 183t, 238t, 243–244 ophthalmia, 209, 210
O
Mycoses. See Fungal infections septicemia, 190
Myeloid cells Neonate, immunoglobulin acquisition in, Obligate aerobes, 180t
characteristics of, 10t–11t 105, 105f Obligate anaerobes, 180t
immune function of, 8 Nephritis, type II hypersensitivity and, Obligate intracellular parasites and
in innate immunity, 32–33, 32t, 33t 119t pathogens, 77, 384, 385
ontogeny of, 9f Neurotoxins, 177t Coxiella burnetii, 243
Myeloperoxidase, 40, 109t Neutralization, antibody isotypes and, 76t culture media for, 173, 173t
Myocarditis, 119t Neutrophil oxidative index (NOI), 42 Mycobacterium leprae, 207
Myonecrosis, 199 Neutrophils Rickettsiae, 240
in acute inflammatory response, 35, 37 Treponema pallidum, 234
N ADCC and, 82, 83f Obstruction
characteristics of, 10t bile duct, 367t
NADPH oxidase
and infectious disease, 368t by large organisms, 176
chronic granulomatous disease and, 42
deficiency in, 109t innate immunity and, 29, 32, 32t respiratory, 362t
ontogeny of, 9f Omenn syndrome, 20t
in intracellular killing, 40
Naegleria spp., 344, 344t in type II hypersensitivity, 118 Omeprazole, 221
Nafcillin + oxacillin, for Staphylococcus in WBC differential, 12t Onchocerca volvulus, 350, 352t
NEWATODES mnemonic, 342n** Oncovirus group, 305
aureus infection, 187
46
IMMUNOLOGY AND MICROBIOLOGY
One way isotype switching, 68 Passive immunotherapy, risks associated Pernicious anemia, 119t
Ontogeny, immune system cells, 7–8, with, 101 Pertussis toxin, 215
7f, 9f PAS stain, 328t See also Whooping cough
Ophthalmia, neonatal, 209, 210 Pasteurella spp., growth requirements, Peyer patches, necrosis of, 231
Opportunistic fungal infections, 337–340 173t pH, as physiologic barrier, 28
Opsonins, 39 Pasteurella multocida, 218, 382 Phages
Opsonization, 5, 39 Pathogen associated molecular patterns in lytic life cycle, 257f
antibodies and, 39, 39f (PAMPs), 3, 29 nontransducing, 259–260, 260f
antibody isotypes and, 76t Pathogenicity specialized transducing, 260–261, 261f
type II hypersensitivity and, 119t complement system activation and, 76t in transduction, 256, 257f
Optochin, 191, 192 determinants of, 383–385 Phagocytic cells
Oral cavitary disease, 359t entry sites for pathogens, 28f defects in, 109t
Oral thrush, 338 of facultative/obligate intracellular extravasation of, 35–37, 36f
Origin of transfer (oriT), conjugation, pathogens, 77 in innate immunity, 3, 5, 6f, 29
251, 251f, 253f–255f innate immune system and, 27, 27f intracellular growth and, 175
Ornithosis, 240t mechanisms for, 174–176 metabolic stimulation and killing
Oropharynx, normal flora of, 180t See also specific bacteria within, 40f
Orthomyxoviridae, 313t, 319–320 Pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), 29 Phagocytosis, 38, 39f
Osteomyelitis, 187t, 232, 372t PCR tests, for Escherichia coli, 224 enhancement of, 39, 39f
Otitis externa, 359t PEECRA mnemonic, 296n** intracellular killing by, 40, 40f
Otitis media Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), 239, mechanisms of, 38
acute, 359t 363t respiratory burst in, 40
Haemophilus influenzae, 217 Penetration, in viral replication, 271f, type II hypersensitivity and, 119t
Moraxella catarrhalis, 210 271t, 273 Yersinia pestis, 228
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 191 Penicillin binding protein mutations, 264t Phagolysosomes, 38, 39f
Outer ear, normal flora of, 180t Penicillin(s) Phagosome lysosome fusion, inhibition
Outer membrane, bacterial, 408t bacterial resistance mechanisms to, 263t of, 205
Outer membrane protein (OMP), 209, for Clostridium perfringens infection, Phagosomes, 38, 39f
215 199 Pharyngitis, 188, 189t
Owl eye bodies, 382t for tetanus, 196 causative organisms algorithm, 379
Oxacillin + nafcillin, for Staphylococcus for viridans streptococci infection, 192 gonococcal, 210
aureus infection, 187 See also β lactams Mycoplasma pneumoniae, 244
Oxidase (cytochrome C oxidase) test, 208 Pentamer, IgM, 71–72, 71f Pharyngoconjuctivitis, 287
Oxygen requirements, bacterial, 180t Pepsin, proteolytic cleavage with, 88, 88f Physical damage, pathogenicity and, 176
Peptide binding groove Physiologic barriers, in innate immune
P MHC class I gene products, 24, 24f system, 3, 6f, 29
MHC class II gene products, 24, 25f Picornaviridae, 296t, 298, 298f, 299t
Pain, acute abdominal, 367t
Pancreatitis, 367t Peptides Pigment production, bacterial, 382
Panencephalitis, subacute sclerosing, 315, binding, and endoplasmic reticulum, 53 Pili and fimbriae
324t cell bound, of B cell receptor, 14–15 bacterial cell structure, 409t
formyl methionyl, acute inflammatory for cell surface adherence, 174
Papain, proteolytic cleavage with, 88, 88f
response and, 37t in Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 209
Papillomaviridae, 282t, 284–285, 284f
non self, cytotoxic T cells and, 80 Pinworm, 351t
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis, 331,
335–336, 336f Peptidoglycan, 176 PITcH mnemonic, 224
as antimicrobial target, 169 Pityriasis, 328
Paragonimus westermani, 354t
in bacterial cell envelope, 167–168, 168f, Placenta, 76t, 388
Parainfluenza virus, 316t
408t Plantar warts, 285
Paralysis
botulinum toxin, 197 inflammation and, 175 Plaque, dental, 192
tetanus toxin, 196 synthesis of, 168, 169f Plasma cells
type II hypersensitivity and, 119t transpeptidation reaction, 169f characteristics of, 10t
Paramyxoviridae, 313t, 314–315, 314f, Perforin ontogeny of, 9f
in ADCC, 83f secretory IgA and, 72
316t
in cytotoxic T cells, 80, 81f, 81t in X linked hyper IgM syndrome, 72
Parasites and parasitic infections
in NK cells, 82, 82t Plasmids
AIDS associated, 311
Periarteriolar lymphoid sheaths (PALS), in bacterial reproduction, 248
classification of, 341–342
52 drug resistance mediated by, 262
and host cell growth/survival, 384–385
Periodontal disease, 234 as extrachromosomal genetic element,
metazoan, 342t, 350–354
protozoan, 341t, 343–349 Peripheral tolerance, 121 248
transmission of, via ova, 387 Periplasmic space, bacterial cell envelope, and internal bacterial structure, 409t
Paratyphoid fever, 231 168, 408t multiple drug resistance, 262–263, 263f
Parvoviridae, 282t, 283–284, 283f Peritonitis, 234, 367t Plasmodium spp., 345f, 346, 346t
Perleche, 338 Plasmodium falciparum, 346
Passive immunization, 100, 101t
468
INDEX
Plasmodium knowlesi, 346t Rh factor and, 119, 119t Enterococcus faecium, 193
Plasmodium malariae, 346t toxoplasmosis in, 349 Streptococcus pyogenes, 188
Plasmodium ovale, 346t Prevotella spp., 234
Plasmodium vivax, 346t PRFOBA mnemonic, 313n*
Q
Pneumococcus spp., 382 Primary immune responses, 100f, 100t
Pneumocystis jirovecii, 72, 311t, 340, 340f Primary lymphoid organs, 21, 22 Q fever, 243
Pneumonia, 362t Prion diseases, 323 Quantiferon TB Gold Test, 206
Acinetobacter baumannii, 212 Progenitor cells, lymphoid and myeloid, 8 Quellung reaction, 191
adenovirus, 287 Progeny viruses, nucleic acid sequence
AIDS associated, 310, 311 of, 273
R
atypical, in Legionnaires disease, 213 Progressive multifocal
Bacillus anthracis, 195 leukoencephalopathy, 324t Rabies, 316–317
causative organisms algorithm, 378 Pro inflammatory cytokines, 43t Rabies virus, 316–317
Chlamydia trachomatis, 239 Prophage receptors for, 273t
Chlamydophila spp., 240, 240t bacteriophage genome and, 248 vaccine for, 103
Coxiella burnetii, 243 botulinum toxin coding by, 197 rag1 gene, 17, 112t
Haemophilus influenzae, 217 of Corynebacterium diphtheriae, 201 rag2 genes, 17, 112t
Klebsiella pneumoniae, 226 lysogeny and, 258 Rashes, in infectious disease, 371t
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, 244 Prophylaxis R determinant, drug resistance and, 262
Pneumocystis jirovecii, 310, 340 active immunization for, 102–104 Reactivational tuberculosis, 205
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 211 in HIV infection, 311t Reactive arthritis
Staphylococcus aureus, 187t for infection treatment/prevention, 391 common causal agents, 372t
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 191 Prostaglandins, in type I hypersensitivity, HLA allele in, 122t
Pneumonic plague, 229 117t Yersinia enterocolitica, 229
Pneumonitis cytomegalovirus, 292, 340 Prostatitis, Ureaplasma urealyticum and, Receptor diversity, generating, 16–20, 19t
pol gene, 306t 244 Receptors, viral, 273t
Polio virus, 107t, 299t Protease inhibitors, in AIDS treatment, 312t Recipient, transplant, 123
Polyarteritis nodosa, 120t Proteasome inhibitors, in cancer Recipient cell, for bacterial conjugation,
Polyclonal antibodies, 90, 90f treatment, 55, 55t 250, 250f, 251, 253f
Polymorphonuclear (PMN) cell. See Protective antigen, anthrax toxin, 195 Recirculation, lymphocyte, 49
Neutrophils Protein synthesis inhibitors, 177t, 264t Recombinant cytokines, 131t
Polyomaviridae, 282t, 286t Protein toxins, 176 Recombinant vaccines, 392
Polysaccharide capsule Proteolytic cleavage of immunoglobulin Recombination
Cryptococcus, 327 papain vs. pepsin, 88, 88f homologous, 248, 249, 250f
Haemophilus influenzae, 217 secretory IgA, 74 site specific, 252, 252f
Neisseria meningitidis, 209 Proteus mirabilis, 230 Recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy, 202
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 191, 192 Proteus vulgaris, 230 Red blood cell (RBC) agglutination
vaccines comprised of, 103 Protozoans, 341t, 343–349, 343t–344t reactions, 92
Pontiac fever, 213 Provirus, retrovirus, 259, 308f, 311t Red pulp, 52, 52f
Poorly visible organisms, on gram stain, Pseudoappendicitis, 229 Reduviid bug, 348t, 386
183n*, 399 Pseudohyphae, 326, 326f, 337, 338f Reference charts and tables, 394–409
Pork tapeworm, 355t Pseudomembranous colitis, 199 Regan Lowe media, 215
Porphyromonas spp., 234 Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 211–212 Regulatory cytokines, in innate immunity,
Positive selection, T cell receptor as biofilm producer, 382 43t
signaling, 25 as capsule producer, 381 Regulatory T cells. See Tregs (regulatory
Positive stranded RNA viruses, 296–312 drug resistance of, 212, 265t T cells)
Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis, medical ecology, 211 Rejection. See Graft rejection
120t, 175 as pigment producer, 382 Release, in viral replication, 271f, 271t,
Post translational modification, in viral Pseudopodia, 36, 38, 39f 274, 274f
replication, 271f, 271t Psittacosis, 240t Renal calculi, 230, 244
Potency, stem cells, 8 Psoriasis, HLA allele in, 122t Renal transplants, 60, 201
Poxviridae, 282t, 293–294, 293f Pulmonary anthrax, 195 Reoviridae, 322t
PPAHHP mnemonic, 282n* Pulmonary sporotrichosis, 330 Reovirus, 322t
PPD skin test, 206, 390 Punch biopsy, leprosy, 207, 208 Replication, viral. See Viral replication
Precipitates and precipitation, 89, 89f Pustule, malignant, 358t Resistance, to drugs. See Drug resistance
Preformed antibodies, graft rejection and, Pyelonephritis, 363t Respiratory burst, in phagocytosis, 40
124 Pyoderma, 189t Respiratory disease, acute, 287
Pregnancy Pyrimethamine + sulfadiazine, for Respiratory distress and difficulty, 362t
hemolytic disease of newborn and, 118, toxoplasmosis, 349 Respiratory droplets, infection via, 388
119, 119t Pyrrolidonyl arylamidase (PYR) positive Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), 316t
infections that cross the placenta in, 388 bacteria Respiratory tract infections, 359t, 362t
Listeria monocytogenes infection in, 201 Enterococcus faecalis, 193 Restriction endonucleases, 252
46
IMMUNOLOGY AND MICROBIOLOGY
Reticuloendothelial (RES) cell, Salmonella spp., 366t for leptospirosis, 238
Histoplasma capsulatum, 331, 332f Salmonella enterica typhi, 231, 382 for Lyme disease, 237
Retinopathy, with keratitis, 360t Salmonella enteritidis, 232 Rickettsia rickettsii, 241
Retrograde axoplasmic transport, rabies Salmonella paratyphi, 231 for syphilis, 235
virus, 316 Salmonella typhimurium, 232 Treponema pallidum, 235
Retroviridae, 296t, 305–312 Sandflies, 348t, 386 Yersinia pestis, 229
rev gene, 307t, 308f “Sandpaper” rash, 188, 189t Serratia spp., as pigment producer, 382
Reye syndrome, 320, 370t SARS CoV, 302–303 Serum sickness, 120t
R factor, drug resistance and, 262, 263f SARS CoV 2, 303–304 Severe acute respiratory syndrome
Rhabdoviridae, 313t, 316–317, 316f Scalded skin syndrome, 187t (SARS), 302–304
Rheumatic fever, 119t, 175, 188, 189t Scarlet fever, 188, 189t Severe combined immunodeficiency
Rheumatoid arthritis Schistosoma haematobium, 353t (SCID), 20t, 111, 112t
CTLA 4 regulation and, 60 Schistosoma japonicum, 353t Sex pili, conjugation, 251, 251f
HLA allele in, 122t Schistosoma mansoni, 353t Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs)
as type IV hypersensitivity reaction, Schistosomiasis, intestinal and vesicular, Chlamydia trachomatis, 239
121t 353t Haemophilus ducreyi, 218
Rh factor, 92, 119 Scrapie, 323t Klebsiella granulomatis, 226
Rhinocerebral infection, 339 Scrub typhus, 240t, 387 Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 209–210
Rhinoviruses, 273t, 298, 299t Secondary immune responses, 99, 100f Treponema pallidum, 234–236
Rhizopus infection, 339 antibodies, 73–76, 76f Shiga toxin, 227
RhoGAMTM, 119 primary immune responses vs., 100t Shigella spp., 227, 366t
Ribosomes, internal bacterial structure, Secondary lymphoid organs Shigellosis, 227
409t antigen transportation to, 49, 50f Shingles, 290
Rice water stools, 221, 222 effector cell production in, 57, 58f Shock, toxic reactions in, 176
Rickettsiaceae, 238t structure of, 50–52, 51f, 52f Sickle cell disease
infections caused by, 240t Secretion systems, type III, 175 B19 parvovirus and, 284
staining process in, 183t Secretory IgA, 74, 75f Salmonella infection and, 231, 232
Rickettsialpox, 387 Selectins Siderophores, 174
Rickettsia rickettsii, 241 E selectins, in extravasation process, Signal transduction complex, antigen
Rifampin 35–36, 36f recognition molecule, 15, 15f
for Brucella infection, 216 L selectins, CD34 and, 127t Silver stain, 328t, 340f, 390
for Haemophilus influenzae infection, 217 Selectin type adhesion molecule, in acute Sinopulmonary infection, 110t
for Neisseria meningitidis infection, 209 inflammatory response, 35 Sinusitis, 359t
Rifamycin resistance, 265t Selective IgA deficiency, 101, 110t Chlamydophila pneumoniae, 240t
RIG like receptors (RLR), 31t Self and non self recognition, adaptive Moraxella catarrhalis, 210
Ringworm infection, 330 immunity and, 4 Streptococcus pneumoniae, 191
RNA viruses Self limitation, for adaptive immunity, 4 Sinusoids, vascular, 49, 52
characteristics, 295 Self renewal, of stem cells, 8 Site specific recombination, 252, 252f
double stranded, 322t, 406 Self study charts, infectious disease, 357, SKHPNC mnemonic, 174, 226, 381
life cycles, 297f, 314f 358–379 Skin
negative stranded, 313–322, 313t, 314f, Self tolerance failure, 113 infectious diseases, 358t
406 See also Autoimmune diseases normal flora, 180t, 328
positive stranded, 296–312, 297f, 406 Septate hyphae, 325, 325f yeast infections, 329
Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF), Septic arthritis, Staphylococcus aureus, See also entries beginning Cutaneous
240t, 241, 387 187t Skin tests, for fungal infections, 327
Rods. See Bacilli Septicemia, 179 Smallpox, 294
Rolling, in phagocyte extravasation Bacteroides fragilis, 234 Smoking, Legionnaires disease and, 213
process, 35–36, 36f Brucella, 215, 216 Somatic hypermutation, 19t, 68
Romaña sign, 348t Candida albicans, 338 Sorbitol MacConkey screen, 224, 226
Rose gardener disease, 330 Escherichia coli, 225t Sore throat, 202, 359t
Roseola, 292 Klebsiella pneumoniae, 226 Spasmolytic drugs, 196
Rotavirus, 107t, 322t, 365t Listeria monocytogenes, 200, 201 Specialization, in adaptive immunity, 4
Roundworms, 342t, 350, 351t–352t neonatal, 190 Specialized transduction, 256, 260–261,
RT inhibitors, in AIDS treatment, 312t Proteus mirabilis, 230 261f, 261t
Rubella virus, 107t, 301, 302t Proteus vulgaris, 230 Specificity, in adaptive immunity, 4
Rubivirus, 301, 302t Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 211, 212 Spherules, fungal, 327, 327f
Salmonella enterica subspp. other than Spirochetes, 234–238, 397
typhi, 232 Spleen, 52, 52f
S
Serology, 85–92 Spore forming bacteria, 381, 396
Sabouraud agar, 327 direct vs. indirect, 91–92, 91f–92f Spore types, in fungal morphology, 327,
“Safety pin” staining, Yersinia pestis, 229 Escherichia coli, 224 327f
St. Louis encephalitis virus, 300, 301t, 370t in fungal infection, 327 Sporothrix schenckii, 330, 331
470
INDEX
Sporotrichosis, 330 Superantigens in specialized transduction, 260–261,
Spread, in viral replication, 272 activation by, 61 261f
Staghorn renal calculi, 230 as exotoxins, 177t Temperature, as physiologic barrier, 28
Stains toxic shock syndrome toxin 1, 186, 187t Terminal deoxyribonucleotidyl
bacterial, 181t Supperative sequelae, in Group A transferase (Tdt), 18, 19f
for diagnosis of infectious disease, 390 Streptococcal infections, 189t Tetanospasmin, 196
in leprosy diagnosis, 208 Suppression, peripheral tolerance and, Tetanus, 196, 197t
Staphylococcus spp., 184t, 185–187, 395 121, 122 Tetanus toxin, 196
Staphylococcus aureus, 184t, 185–187 Surgical infections, Staphylococcus aureus, Tetracycline resistance, 263t, 264t
as biofilm producer, 382 187t Th17 cells, 62–64, 63f
diarrhea by intoxication with, 364t Survival, intracellular, 175 Thayer Martin medium, 210
diseases associated with, 187t Susceptibility testing, 266–267 Thiosulfate citrate bile salt (TCBS), for
as pigment producer, 382 Swarming motility, 230 Vibrio infection, 222
resistance to drugs, 264t Sweating, Brucella infection and, 216 Threadworm, 352t
Staphylococcus epidermis, 184t, 185, 382 Swelling, physical damage associated Throat infections, 359t
Staphylococcus mutans, 382 with, 176 Thrombocytopenia, 112
Staphylococcus saprophyticus, 184t, 185 Swimmer’s itch, 354t Thrush, 338
Stationary phase, in bacterial growth and Syncytia formation, 382t Thymus
death, 172, 172f Syngeneic grafts, 123, 124 structure of, 22–23, 23f
Stem cells Syphilis, 234, 235f T cell development in, 8, 22–23, 23f
lymphoid (See Lymphoid cell) Systemic anaphylaxis, 101, 117t T cell selection in, 25
multipotent, 7–8 Systemic inflammation, 41 thymocyte development in, 9f, 23, 25
myeloid (See Myeloid cells) Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), Thymus dependent (TD) antigens, 65–66,
pluripotent, 126 120t, 122t 65f, 68
potency, 8 Thymus independent (TI) antigens,
self renewal, 8 65–66, 65f, 68
T
Stomach, normal flora of, 180t Tick borne relapsing fever, 237, 387
Stomach cancer, Helicobacter pylori and, Taenia saginata (beef tapeworm), 355t Ticks and tick bites
220 Taenia solium (pork tapeworm), 355t Borrelia spp., 236–237
Strawberry tongue, 188, 189t TAP complex, 54 disease vectors for, 387
Streptococcus spp., 184t, 188–192, 395 Tapeworms, 342t, 354, 355t Francisella tularensis, 213–214
Streptococcus agalactiae, 184t, 190 tat gene, 307t, 308f Rickettsiae, 241
Streptococcus gallolyticus, 192 T cell defects, 111, 112t Tinea (ringworm) infections, 330
Streptococcus mutans, 192 T cell mediated (type IV) Tinea versicolor, 328
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 184t, hypersensitivity. See Delayed type Tissue
191–192 hypersensitivity (DTH) infectious diseases, 358t
as capsule producer, 381 T cell receptor (TCR), 15, 16t keratinized, superficial fungal infection,
penicillin binding protein mutations, α/β chains, 17, 17f, 18f 328
264t antigenic specificity of, 19 lymphoid (See Primary lymphoid
vaccines for, 103, 107t MHC class II binding by naive, 57 organs; Secondary lymphoid
Streptococcus pyogenes, 188–190, 189t MHC–peptide complex and, 61 organs)
as capsule producer, 382 T cell regulation. See Tregs (regulatory T transplantation (See Transplantation)
identifying features of, 184t cells) Tissue borne antigens, 50, 175
Streptococcus sanguis, 192 T cells (T lymphocytes) T lymphocytes. See T cells
Streptolysin O, 188 activation of, 57–62, 58f, 59f Togaviridae, 296t, 301, 302t
Streptolysin S, 188 antigen recognition molecules, 17–18, 18f Tolerance
Streptomycin, for tularemia, 214 cytotoxic (See Cytotoxic T lymphocytes central, 113, 121
Strongyloides stercoralis, 350, 352t [CTLs]) clonal anergy and deletion, 21
Structural toxins, 176 development and differentiation of, peripheral, 121
Subacute endocarditis, 193, 361t 22–26, 26f, 57 Toll like receptor (TLR), 31t, 167
Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, 315, graft versus host disease and, 126 TORCH mnemonic, 388
324t and Hib vaccine, 103 Toxicity
Subcapsular sinus, 50 immune system function and, 5, 6f, 8 mechanisms of, 174–176
Subcutaneous granulomas, 358t recirculation of, 58f oxygen requirements and, 180t
Subcutaneous mycoses, 330–331 surface molecules, 60 Toxicosis, botulism, 198t
Subunit vaccines, 392 T cell signal transduction complex, 15, Toxic shock syndrome, 187t
Sulfadiazine + pyrimethamine, for 15f Toxic shock syndrome toxin 1 (TSST 1)
toxoplasmosis, 349 Teichoic acids, 174, 176 superantigen, 186, 187t
Sulfatides, Mycobacterium tuberculosis Telangiectasia, 112t Toxins, 176, 177t
and, 205 Tellurite medium, 173 See also specific types and organisms
Sulfonamides, 204, 263t Temperate phages, 256, 258–260 Toxocara canis, 351t
Sulfur granules, in actinomycosis, 203 in site specific recombination, 252 Toxocara cati, 351t
47
IMMUNOLOGY AND MICROBIOLOGY
Toxoid vaccines, 103, 196, 202, 392 Tsetse flies, 348t, 387 V
Toxoplasma gondii, 311t, 349, 349t TSH receptor, in Graves disease, 119t
Vaccination, 99
Tracheal cytotoxin, Bordetella pertussis Tuberculin, Mycobacterium tuberculosis
for Haemophilus influenzae prevention,
and, 214 and, 205
217
Trachoma, 239 Tuberculin test, 121t, 390
recommended childhood schedule, 106,
Transducing phages, 257f, 260–261, 261f Tuberculoid leprosy, 65
106t
Transduction Tuberculosis, primary pulmonary, 205
See also Immunization
bacterial DNA transfer, 256, 257f Tularemia, 387
Vaccines
and conjugation and transformation pneumonic, 214
bacterial, 107t
processes compared, 261t ulceroglandular, 213, 214
component, 104, 107t
generalized, 256, 261t Tumbling motility, Listeria
conjugate, 103, 104f
specialized, 256, 260–261, 261f, 261t monocytogenes, 200
contraindications, 102
Transendothelial migration, in phagocyte Tumor cells, NK cell killing mechanisms,
immunologic memory and, 100
extravasation, 36, 36f 82
for infection treatment/prevention,
Transformation Tumor growth factor β (TGF β)
391–392
conjugation, transduction, and, 261t helper T cell differentiation and,
for influenza, 320
gene transfer and, 249, 249f 63f, 64
killed, 102–103, 107t
Transforming growth factor β, 130t in innate immunity, 43t
live viral, 102, 107t
Transfusion, hyperacute graft rejection Tumor necrosis factor, ADCC and, 82
meningitis, 209
and, 124 Tumor necrosis factor α (TNF α), 130t
polysaccharide, 103
Transfusion reaction, 93, 119t in ADCC, 83f
tetanus, 197t
Transpeptidation reaction, 169f cytotoxic T cells and, 80
toxoid, 103, 176
Transplantation, 123–125, 125t graft rejection and, 124
tuberculosis, 206
ABO blood typing and, 94, 94f in innate immunity, 43t
viral, 107t
graft tissues types, 123 LPS activation and, 176
See also Immunization; Vaccination;
graft versus host disease, 126 Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection and,
specific infectious agents
rejection of graft (See Graft rejection) 244
Vagina, normal flora of, 180t
Transposases, 263 in systemic inflammatory response, 41,
Vaginal itching and pain, 363t
Transposition, 252 41f
Vaginitis, Candida albicans, 338
Transpositional insertion, plasmid Tumor necrosis factor β (TNF β), 131t
Vaginosis, bacterial, 233
mediated drug resistance, 262 cytotoxic T cells and, 80
Valley fever, 333–334
Transposons graft rejection and, 124
Vancomycin
intergration of (transposition), 252 Typhoid fever, 231
effect on peptidoglycan synthesis, 170t
multiple drug resistance plasmids and, Typhus, 240t
for Streptococcus pneumoniae, 192
262–263 Tyrosine kinase deficiency, 110t
Vancomycin intermediate Staphylococcus
tra region, 251, 254f Tzanck smear, 289, 290
aureus (VISA), 187
Tregs (regulatory T cells), 26, 26f, 64
Vancomycin resistance
CTLA 4 expression on, 60, 122 U
Enterococcus, 193, 264t
Trehalose dimycolate, Mycobacterium
Ulceroglandular disease, 213, 214 mechanisms of, 170t, 263t
tuberculosis and, 205 Ulcers Vancomycin resistant Staphylococcus
Trematodes, 342t, 353, 353t–354t
Shigella and, 227 aureus (VRSA), 187
Treponema pallidum, 234–236
subcutaneous, 358t Variable domains, receptor diversity,
Trichinella spiralis, 350, 352t
Uncoating, in viral replication, 271f, 271t, 16–17
Trichinosis, 352t
273, 273t Varicella zoster virus (VZV), 107t, 290,
Trichomonas vaginalis, 344t
Upper respiratory tract infection, 359t 293t
Trichophyton spp., 329
Urea breath test, 221 Variola, 294
Trichuris trichiura, 350, 351t
Ureaplasma urealyticum, 244 VDJ rearrangement, heavy chain, 17, 17f,
Trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole Urease positive bacteria 18, 19t
(TMP SMX) Helicobacter pylori, 220–221 Vectors
for Moraxella catarrhalis infection, 210 Proteus mirabilis/Proteus vulgaris, 230 arthropod (insect), 386–387
for nocardiosis, 204 Urethra, normal flora of, 180t arthropod (not insect), 388
for Proteus mirabilis/Proteus vulgaris
Urethritis, 363t parasitic, 342
infection, 230
gonococcal, 210 Venezuelan equine encephalitis (VEE)
for Salmonella infection, 232
nongonococcal, 239 virus, 301, 302t
Trivalent (A B E) antitoxin, 198t
Ureaplasma urealyticum, 244 Vesicular lesions, 358t
Trypanosoma brucei gambiense,
Urinary antigen test, 213 Vibrio spp., 221–222
175, 348t
Urinary tract infection Vibrio cholerae, 221–222
Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense, causative organisms algorithm, 374 culture media for, 173t
175, 348t Escherichia coli, 225t noninflammatory diarrhea with, 365t
Trypanosoma cruzi, 348t Klebsiella pneumoniae, 226 Vibrio parahaemolyticus, 222t, 365t
Trypanosomes, 175, 347, 347f, 348t Proteus mirabilis/Proteus vulgaris, 230 Vibrio vulnificus, 222t
Trypomastigotes, 347, 347f, 348t
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 212 vif gene, 307
472
INDEX
Viral hepatitis, 277–281 RNA, 296–322, 313t, 322t, 406 Wiskott Aldrich syndrome, 112t
See also specific viruses by name slow conventional, 324t Woolsorter’s disease, 195
Viral infection(s) spread, 272 Wound management, 197t, 199, 358t
by age group, 276f structure and morphology of, 269f–270f Wright Giemsa stain, 226
AIDS associated, 311 See also Viral infection(s); individual Wuchereria bancrofti, 350, 352t
in immunodeficiency disease, 111 viruses and families by name
patterns in, 275–276 Visceral larva migrans, 351t X
time courses for, 275f Visceral leishmaniasis, 348t
Xenogeneic grafts, 123
Viral receptors, 273t VJ rearrangement, light chain, 17, 18f
X linked agammaglobulinemia, 110t
Viral replication, 271f Volutin, 201
X linked hyper IgM syndrome, 72, 110t
attachment, 271f, 272, 273f, 273t
drugs targeting, 271t
Y
W
entry into host cell, 271f, 273
Yeast infections
by genomic nucleic acid replication, Walking pneumonia, 240, 240t, 244
Candida albicans, 337–338, 338f
271f, 273, 273t Warthin Finkeldey cells, 315
of skin, 329
hepatitis B, 279f Warts
herpes virus, 283f human papilloma virus, 285 Yeasts, morphology of, 326, 326f
Yellow fever, 102, 300, 301t
by macromolecular synthesis, 271f, 273, molluscum contagiosum, 294
273t Weil disease, 238 Yersinia enterocolitica, 229–230, 366t
Yersinia pestis, 228–229, 382
spread, 272 Weil Felix test
steps in, 271–274 Proteus mirabilis/Proteus vulgaris, 230,
Z
and viral release, 271f, 274, 274f 390
Viral vaccines, 107t Rickettsia rickettsii, 241, 390 ‘Ziehl Neelsen acid fast stain, 181t
Viridans streptococci, 184t, 192 Western equine encephalitis virus Zika virus, 300, 301t
Virions, structure and morphology, 269f (WEE), 301, 302t, 370t Zone of equivalence. See Equivalence and
Virulent phages, in transduction, 256 West Nile encephalitis virus, 300, 301t, equivalence zone
Viruses 370t Zoonotic organisms, 216, 386
cytopathogenesis, 382t Wheals, 117t Bacillus anthracis, 194–195
damage from, pathogenicity and, 175 Whiff test, Gardnerella, 233 Brucella, 215–216
DNA, 282–295, 406 Whipworm, 351t Chlamydophila psittaci, 240
genetics, 306t–307t White blood cells, 8, 10t–11t Coxiella burnetii, 243
innate response to, 44–46 laboratory evaluation of, 11, 12t Francisella tularensis, 213–214
lytic virus life cycle, 257f ontogeny of, 9f Leptospira interrogans, 237–238
naked vs. enveloped, 273t White pulp, 52, 52f Listeria monocytogenes, 200–201
prion diseases, 323t Whooping cough, 215t Rickettsia rickettsii, 241
receptors, 273t Widal test, 231 Yersinia enterocolitica, 229–230
release, 271f, 274, 274f Window period. See Equivalence and Yersinia pestis, 228–229
replication of (See Viral replication) equivalence zone Zygomycophyta, 339
47

