PRECLINICAL
PHYSIOLOGY
REVIEW
2023
®
FOR USMLE
STEP 1 AND
®
COMLEX USA
LEVEL 1
USMLE® and United States Medical Licensing Examination® is a joint program of the National Board of
Medical Examiners (NBME) and the Federation of State Medical Boards (FSMB), which are not affiliated with
Kaplan and were not involved in the production of, and do not endorse, this product. COMLEX USA® is a
registered trademark of the National Board of Osteopathic Medical Examiners, Inc. (NBOME), which isnot
affiliated with Kaplan and was not involved in the production of, and does not endorse, this product
PRECLINICAL
PHYSIOLOGY
REVIEW
2023
FOR USMLE® STEP 1 AND
COMLEX USA® LEVEL 1
USMLE®and United States Medical Licensing Examination® isajointprogram ofthe National Board ofMedical Examiners (NBME) andthe Federation
ofState Medical Boards (FSMB), which are notaffiliated withKaplan and were notinvolved inthe production of,and donotendorse, this product.
COMLEX USA®isaregistered trademark ofthe National Board ofOsteopathic Medical Examiners, Inc.(NBOME), which isnotaffiliated withKaplan and
was notinvolved inthe production of,and does notendorse, this product.
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 1 15/10/22 2:19P
USMLE® and United States Medical Licensing Examination® is a joint program of the National Board of Medical Examiners
(NBME) and the Federation of State Medical Boards (FSMB), which are not affiliated with Kaplan and were not involved in
the production of, and do not endorse, this product.
COMLEX USA® is a registered trademark of the National Board of Osteopathic Medical Examiners, Inc. (NBOME), which is
not affiliated with Kaplan and was not involved in the production of, and does not endorse, this product.
This publication isdesigned to provide accurate information in regard to the subject matter covered as of its publication
date, with the understanding that knowledge and best practice constantly evolve. The publisher is not engaged in rendering
medical, legal, accounting, or other professional service. Ifmedical or legal advice or other expert assistance is required,
the services of a competent professional should be sought. This publication is not intended for use in clinical practice or
the delivery of medical care. To the fullest extent of the law, neither the publisher nor the editors assume any liability for any
injury and/or damage to persons or property arising out of or related to any use of the material contained in this book.
All rights reserved. The text of this publication, or any part thereof, may not be reproduced in any manner whatsoever without
written permission from the publisher.
© 2023 by Kaplan North America, LLC
Published by Kaplan Medical, a division of Kaplan North America, LLC.
1515 West Cypress Creek Road
Fort Lauderdale, Florida 33309
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Course ISBN: 978 1 5062 8462 0
All rights reserved under International and Pan American Copyright Conventions. By
payment of the required fees, you have been granted the non exclusive, non transferable
right to access and read the text of this eBook on screen. No part of this text may be
reproduced, transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or
introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any
means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the
express written permission of the publisher.
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 2 15/10/22 2:19P
Editors
L. Britt Wilson, PhD
Professor
Department of Pharmacology, Physiology, and Neuroscience
University of South Carolina School of Medicine
Columbia, SC
Contributors
Raj Dasgupta, MD, FACP, FCCP, FAASM
Assistant Professor of Clinical Medicine
Assistant Program Director of Internal Medicine Residency
Associate Program Director of Sleep Medicine Fellowship
Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine
Keck School of Medicine of USC, University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA
Frank P. Noto, MD
Internal Medicine
New York, NY
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 3 15/10/22 2:19P
We want to hear what you think. What do you like or not like about the Notes?
Please email us at medfeedback@kaplan.com.
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 4 15/10/22 2:19P
Table of Contents
PART I: FLUID DISTRIBUTION AND EDEMA
CHAPTER 1: Fluid Distribution and Edema . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
PART II: EXCITABLE TISSUE
CHAPTER 1: Ionic Equilibrium and Resting Membrane Potential . . . . . . . . . 19
CHAPTER 2: The Neuron Action Potential and Synaptic Transmission . . . . . . . 27
CHAPTER 3: Electrical Activity of the Heart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
PART III: MUSCLE
CHAPTER 1: Excitation Contraction Coupling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
CHAPTER 2: Skeletal Muscle Mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
PART IV: CARDIOVASCULAR
CHAPTER 1: Hemodynamics and Important Principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
CHAPTER 2: Cardiac Muscle Mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
CHAPTER 3: CV Regulation and Cardiac Output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
CHAPTER 4: Regulation of Blood Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
CHAPTER 5: Cardiac Cycle and Valvular Heart Disease . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
PART V: RESPIRATION
CHAPTER 1: Lung Mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
CHAPTER 2: Alveolar–Blood Gas Exchange . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
CHAPTER 3: Transport of O2 and CO2 and the Regulation
of Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
CHAPTER 4: Ventilation/Perfusion Matching and Hypoxemia . . . . . . . . . 175
v
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 5 15/10/22 2:19P
PART VI: RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
CHAPTER 1: Renal Structure and Glomerular Filtration . . . . . . . . . . . . 189
CHAPTER 2: Solute Transport: Reabsorption and Secretion . . . . . . . . . . 203
CHAPTER 3: Clinical Estimation of GFR and Patterns of Clearance . . . . . . . 213
CHAPTER 4: Regional Transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 219
CHAPTER 5: Acid–Base Regulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 235
PART VII: ENDOCRINOLOGY
CHAPTER 1: General Aspects of the Endocrine System . . . . . . . . . . . . 251
CHAPTER 2: Hypothalamic–Anterior Pituitary System . . . . . . . . . . . . . 257
CHAPTER 3: Posterior Pituitary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 261
CHAPTER 4: Adrenal Cortex . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 269
CHAPTER 5: Adrenal Medulla . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 293
CHAPTER 6: Endocrine Pancreas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 297
CHAPTER 7: Hormonal Control of Calcium and Phosphate. . . . . . . . . . . 313
CHAPTER 8: Thyroid Hormones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 327
CHAPTER 9: Growth, Growth Hormone, and Puberty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 345
CHAPTER 10: Male Reproductive System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 353
CHAPTER 11: Female Reproductive System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 361
PART VIII: GASTROINTESTINAL PHYSIOLOGY
CHAPTER 1: Overview and Motility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 381
CHAPTER 2: Secretions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 387
CHAPTER 3: Digestion and Absorption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 397
INDEX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405
Additional resources available at
kaptest.com/usmlebookresources
vi
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 6 15/10/22 2:19P
PART I
FLUID DISTRIBUTION
AND EDEMA
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 1 15/10/22 2:19P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 2 15/10/22 2:19P
1#
Fluid Distribution and Edema
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Interpret scenarios on distribution of fluids within the body
❏ Answer questions about review and integration
❏ Use knowledge of microcirculation
❏ Interpret scenarios on edema (pathology integration)
❏ Interpret scenarios on volume measurement of compartments
DISTRIBUTION OF FLUIDS WITHIN THE BODY
Total Body Water (~60% of body mass)
• Intracellular fluid (ICF): ~2/3 of total body water
• Extracellular fluid (ECF): ~1/3 of total body water
• Interstitial fluid (ISF): ~3/4 of the extracellular fluid
• Plasma volume (PV): ~1/4 of the extracellular fluid
• Vascular compartment: contains the blood volume, which is plasma and
the cellular elements of blood, primarily red blood cells
It is important to remember that membranes can serve as barriers. The 2 impor
tant membranes are shown below. The cell membrane is a relative barrier for Na+,
while the capillary membrane is a barrier for plasma proteins.
ICF ECF
Solid line division represents
cell membrane
Vascular
ISF
volume Dashed line division represents
capillary membranes
Figure I 1I 11.F1i.guBreody Compartments
3
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 3 15/10/22 2:19P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART I | FLUID DISTRIBUTION AND EDEMA
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Osmosis
The distribution of fluid is determined by the osmotic movement of water.
Osmosis is the diffusion of water across a semipermeable or selectively permeable
membrane. Water diffuses from a region of higher water concentration to a region
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
of lower water concentration. The concentration of water in a solution is deter
mined by the concentration of solute; the greater the solute concentration, the
lower the water concentration.
Microbiology The osmotic properties are defined by:
• Osmolarity:
mOsm (milliosmoles)/L = concentration of particles per liter of
solution
• Osmolality:
mOsm/kg = concentration of particles per kg of solvent (water being
the germane one for physiology/medicine)
It is the number of particles that is crucial. As shown below, there are 2 compart
ments separated by a membrane that is permeable to water but not to solute.
A B
FigFurigeureI 1 2.IOs1mo2s.is
Side B has the greater concentration of solute (circles) and thus a lower water
concentration than side A. As a result, water diffuses from A to B, and the height
of column B rises, and that of A falls.
If a solute does not easily cross a membrane, then it is an “effective” osmole for
that compartment, i.e., it creates an osmotic force for water. For example, plasma
proteins do not easily cross the capillary membrane, so they serve as effective
osmoles for the vascular compartment.
Sodium does not easily penetrate the cell membrane, but it does cross the capillary
membrane, thus it is an effective osmole for the extracellular compartment.
Extracellular Solutes
A basic metabolic profile/panel (BMP) includes the common labs provided from a
basic blood draw, often with normal values for the solutes.
4
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 4 15/10/22 2:19P
CHAPTER 1 | FLUID DISTRIBUTION AND EDEMA
NOTE
[Na+] ] BUN 140 104* 15 Normal values will be provided on the exam,
Glucose 80 so memorizing these numbers is not
] [HC[OC3l–[K+–] Cr 4 24 1
required. However, knowing them can be
useful for time management.
Figure I 1 3.FBigausrice MetabIol1ic 3. Profile/Panel
*Value provided for chloride is the one most commonly used, but it can vary
depending upon the lab
RANGES
Na+: 136–145 mEq/L
Osmolar Gap
K+: 3.5–5.0 mEq/L
The osmolar gap is the difference between the measured osmolality and the
estimated osmolality using the equation below. Using the data from the BMP, we Cl–: 100–106 mEq/L
can estimate the extracellular osmolality using the following formula:
HCO3 –: 22–26 mEq/L
ECF estimated osmolality = 2(Na +) mEq/L + _g_l_u_co_s_e______mg % + u _ r _ e _ a _____ m _ g %
18 2.8
BUN: 8–25 mg/dL
The basis of this calculation is:
Cr (creatinine): 0.8–1.2 mg/dL
• Na+ is the most abundant osmole of the extracellular space.
Glucose: 70–100 mg/dL
• Na+ is doubled because it is a positive charge, and thus for every positive
charge there is a negative charge (chloride being the most abundant, but
not the only one).
• The 18 and 2.8 are converting glucose and BUN into their respective
osmolarities (their units of measurement are mg/dL).
Determining the osmolar gap (normal ≤15) is helpful for narrowing the differen
tial diagnosis. While many things can elevate the osmolar gap, some of the more
common are ethanol, methanol, ethylene glycol, acetone, and mannitol. Thus, an
inebriated patient has an elevated osmolar gap.
Graphical Representation of Body Compartments
It is important to understand how body osmolality and the intracellular and
extracellular volumes change in clinically relevant situations. One way to present
this information is shown below. The y axis is solute concentration or osmolality.
The x axis is the volume of intracellular (2/3) and extracellular (1/3) fluid.
If the solid line represents the control state, the dashed lines show a decrease in
osmolality and extracellular volume but an increase in intracellular volume.
Concentration of Solute
ICF ECF
Volume Volume
o
FigureFigureI 1I 144.. DDaarrrrooww YannYeatnnetDiagramDiagram
5
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 5 15/10/22 2:19P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART I | FLUID DISTRIBUTION AND EDEMA
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
• Extracellular volume always enlarges when there is a net gain of fluid by
the body. Extracellular volume always decreases when there is a net loss of
body fluid.
• Concentration of solutes is equivalent to body osmolality. At steady state,
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
the intracellular concentration of water equals the extracellular concentra
tion of water (cell membrane is not a barrier for water). Thus, the intracel
lular and extracellular osmolalities are the same.
• Intracellular volume varies with the effective osmolality of the extracel
Microbiology
lular compartment. Solutes and fluids enter and leave the extracellular
compartment first (sweating, diarrhea, fluid resuscitation, etc.). Intracel
lular volume is only altered if extracellular osmolality changes.
• If ECF osmolality increases, cells lose water and shrink. If ECF osmolality
decreases, cells gain water and swell.
Below are 6 Darrow Yannet diagrams illustrating changes in volume and/or
osmolality. Examine the alterations, trying to determine what occurred and how.
Consider whether the change represents net water and/or solute gain or loss.
Indicate, too, how the situation would likely occur from a clinical perspective, i.e.,
the patient is hemorrhaging, drinking water, consuming excess salt, etc.
Changes in volume and concentration (dashed lines)
Figure I 1I 15. 5.Figure
Figure I 1I 16. 6.Figure
6
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 6 15/10/22 2:19P
CHAPTER 1 | FLUID DISTRIBUTION AND EDEMA
Figure I1I 17. 7.Figure
Figure I1I 81. 8.Figure
Figure II1 19. 9.Figure
Figure II1110.10.Figure
7
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 7 15/10/22 2:19P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART I | FLUID DISTRIBUTION AND EDEMA
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Explanations
Figure I 1 5: Patient shows loss of extracellular volume with no change in
osmolality. Since extracellular osmolality is the same, then intracellular volume is
unchanged. This represents an isotonic fluid loss (equal loss of fluid and os
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
moles). Possible causes are hemorrhage, isotonic urine, or the immediate conse
quences of diarrhea or vomiting.
Figure I 1 6: Patient shows loss of extracellular and intracellular volume with
rise in osmolality. This represents a net loss of water (greater loss of water than
Microbiology
osmoles). Possible causes are inadequate water intake or sweating. Pathologically,
this could be hypotonic water loss from the urine resulting from diabetes
insipidus.
Figure I 1 7: Patient shows gain of extracellular volume, increase in osmolality,
and a decrease in intracellular volume. The rise in osmolality shifted water out of
the cell. This represents a net gain of solute (increase in osmoles greater than
increase in water). Possible causes are ingestion of salt, hypertonic infusion of
solutes that distribute extracellularly (saline, mannitol), or hypertonic infusion of
colloids. Colloids, e.g., dextran, don’t readily cross the capillary membrane and
thus expand the vascular compartment only (vascular is part of extracellular
compartment).
Figure I 1 8: Patient shows increase in extracellular and intracellular volumes with
a decrease in osmolality. The fall in osmolality shifted water into the cell. Thus, this
represents net gain of water (more water than osmoles). Possible causes are
drinking significant quantities of water (could be pathologic primary polydipsia),
drinking significant quantities of a hypotonic fluid, or ahypotonic fluid infusion
(saline, dextrose in water). Pathologically this could be abnormal water retention
such as that which occurs with syndrome of inappropriate ADH.
Figure I 1 9: Patient shows increase in extracellular volume with no change in
osmolality or intracellular volume. Since extracellular osmolality didn’t change,
then intracellular volume is unaffected. This represents a net gain of isotonic fluid
(equal increase fluid and osmoles). Possible causes are isotonic fluid infusion
(saline), drinking significant quantities of an isotonic fluid, or infusion of an
isotonic colloid. Pathologically this could be the result of excess aldosterone.
Aldosterone is a steroid hormone that causes Na+ retention by the kidney. At first
glance one would predict excess Na+ retention by aldosterone would increase the
concentration of Na+ in the extracellular compartment. However, this is rarely the
case because water follows Na+, and even though the total body mass of Na+
increases, its concentration doesn’t.
Figure I 1 10: Patient shows decrease in extracellular volume and osmolality with
an increase in intracellular volume. The rise in intracellular volume is the result of
the decreased osmolality. This represents a net loss of hypertonic fluid (more
osmoles lost than fluid). The only cause to consider is the pathologic state of adre
nal insufficiency. Lack of mineralocorticoids, e.g., aldosterone causes excess Na+
loss.
8
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 8 15/10/22 2:19P
CHAPTER 1 | FLUID DISTRIBUTION AND EDEMA
Table I 1 1. Volume Changes and Body Osmolarity Following Changes in Body Hydration
ECF Body ICF D Y
Volume Osmolarity Volume Diagram
Loss of isotonic fluid ↓ no no
change change
Hemorrhage
Diarrhea
Vomiting Figure I 2 3a.
Loss of hypotonic fluid
↓ ↑ ↓
Dehydration
Diabetes insipidus
Alcoholism Figure I 2 3b.
Gain of isotonic fluid ↑ no no
change change
Isotonic saline
Gain of hypotonic fluid ↑ ↓ ↑
Figure I 2 3c.
Hypotonic saline
Water intoxication
Figure I 2 3d.
Gain of hypertonic fluid ↑ ↑ ↓
Hypertonic saline
Hypertonic mannitol
Figure I 2 3e.
ECF = extracellular fluid; ICF = intracellular fluid; D Y = Darrow Yannet
Recall Question
Which of the following volume changes would most likely be seen
in a 38 year old man who is lost and dehydrated in a desert?
A. Loss of isotonic fluid with ECF volume contraction, no change
in total body osmolarity, no change in ICF volume
B. Loss of hypotonic fluid with ECF volume contraction, increase
in total body osmolarity, ICF volume contraction
C. Loss of hypotonic fluid with ECF volume contraction, no
change in total body osmolarity, no change in ICF volume
D. Loss of hypertonic fluid with ECF volume contraction, decrease
in total body osmolarity, increase in ICF volume
E. Loss of hypertonic fluid with ECF volume expansion, decrease
in total body osmolarity, decrease in ICF volume
Answer: B
REVIEW AND INTEGRATION
Let’s review 2 important hormones involved in volume regulation: aldosterone and
anti diuretic hormone (also covered in the Renal and Endocrine sections).
9
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 9 15/10/22 2:19P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART I | FLUID DISTRIBUTION AND EDEMA
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Aldosterone
One fundamental function of aldosterone is to increase sodium reabsorption in
principal cells of the kidney. This reabsorption of sodium plays a key role in
regulating extracellular volume.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Aldosterone also plays an important role in regulating plasma potassium and
increases the secretion of this ion in principal cells.
The 2 primary factors stimulating aldosterone release are:
Microbiology
• Plasma angiotensin II (Ang II)
• Plasma K+
NOTE
Anti Diuretic Hormone
ADH secretion is primarily regulated by
Anti diuretic hormone (ADH) (or arginine vasopressin [AVP]) stimulates water
plasma osmolality and blood pressure/
reabsorption in principal cells of the kidney via the V2 receptor. By regulating
volume. However, it can also be stimulated
water, ADH plays a pivotal role in regulating extracellular osmolality.
by Ang IIand corticotropin releasing
ADH also vasoconstricts arterioles (V1 receptor) and thus can serve as a hormonal
hormone (CRH).
regulator of vascular tone.
This influence of CRH is particularly relevant
The 2 primary regulators of ADH are:
to clinical medicine, because avariety of
stresses (e.g., surgery) can increase ADH • Plasma osmolality (directly related): an increase stimulates while a
secretion. decrease inhibits
• Blood pressure/volume (inversely related): an increase inhibits while a
decrease stimulates
Renin
Although renin is an enzyme, not a hormone, it is important in this discussion
because it catalyzes the conversion of angiotensinogen to angiotensin I, which in
turn is converted to Ang II by angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE). This is the
renin angiotensin aldosterone system (RAAS).
The 3 primary regulators of renin are:
• Perfusion pressure to the kidney (inversely related): an increase inhibits,
while a decrease stimulates
• Sympathetic stimulation to the kidney (direct effect via β 1 receptors)
• Na+ delivery to the macula densa (inversely related): an increase inhibits,
while a decrease stimulates
Negative Feedback Regulation
When examining the function and regulation of these hormones, one should see
the feedback regulation. For example, aldosterone increases sodium reabsorption,
which in turn increases extracellular volume. Renin is stimulated by reduced blood
pressure (perfusion pressure to the kidney; reflex sympathetic stimulation). Thus,
aldosterone is released as a means to compensate for the fall in arterial blood
pressure.
10
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 10 15/10/22 2:19P
CHAPTER 1 | FLUID DISTRIBUTION AND EDEMA
Application
Given the above, review the previous Darrow Yannet diagrams and predict what
would happen to levels of each hormone in the various conditions.
Figure I 1 5: Loss of extracellular volume stimulates RAAS and ADH.
Figure I 1 6: Decreased extracellular volume stimulates RAAS. This drop in
extracellular volume stimulates ADH, as does the rise in osmolarity. This setting
would be a strong stimulus for ADH.
Figure I 1 7: The rise in extracellular volume inhibits RAAS. It is difficult to
predict what will happen to ADH in this setting. The rise in extracellular volume
inhibits, but the rise in osmolality stimulates, thus it will depend upon the magni
tude of the changes. In general, osmolality is a more important factor, but signifi
cant changes in vascular volume/pressure can exert profound effects.
Figure I 1 8: The rise in extracellular volume inhibits RAAS and ADH. In
addition, the fall in osmolality inhibits ADH.
Figure I 1 9: The rise in extracellular volume inhibits both.
Figure I 1 10: Although the only cause to consider is adrenal insufficiency, if this
scenario were to occur, then the drop in extracellular volume stimulates RAAS. It
is difficult to predict what happens to ADH in this setting. The drop in extracellu
lar volume stimulates, but the fall in osmolality inhibits, thus it depends upon the
magnitude of the changes.
MICROCIRCULATION
Filtration and Absorption
Fluid flux across the capillary is governed by the 2 fundamental forces that cause
water flow:
• Hydrostatic force, which is simply the pressure of the fluid
• Osmotic (oncotic) force, which represents the osmotic force created by
solutes that do not cross the membrane
Each force exists on both sides of the membrane. Filtration is the movement
of fluid from the plasma into the interstitium, while absorption is movement of
fluid from the interstitium into the plasma.
Hydrostatic pressure Interstitium (+) PIF (–) (+) πIF Filtration(+) P = hydrostatic pressure
=O (m sm ai o n t l i y c ( p o r n o c te o i t n ic s) ) pressure Capillary Pc (–) πc Absorption(–) π = osmotic (oncotic) pressure
(mainly proteins)
Figure I1 11. Starling Forces
Figure I 1 11. Starling Forces
11
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 11 15/10/22 2:19P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART I | FLUID DISTRIBUTION AND EDEMA
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Forces for filtration
PC = hydrostatic pressure (blood pressure) in the capillary
This is directly related to blood flow (regulated at the arteriole); venous pressure;
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
and blood volume.
πIF = oncotic (osmotic) force in the interstitium
This is determined by the concentration of protein in the interstitial fluid. Nor
Microbiology mally the small amount of protein that leaks to the interstitium is minor and is
removed by the lymphatics. Under most conditions, this is not an important factor
influencing the exchange of fluid.
Forces for absorption
πC = oncotic (osmotic) pressure of plasma
This is the oncotic pressure of plasma solutes that cannot diffuse across the
capillary membrane, i.e., the plasma proteins. Albumin, synthesized in the liver, is
the most abundant plasma protein and thus the biggest contributor to this force.
PIF = hydrostatic pressure in the interstitium
This pressure is difficult to determine. In most cases it is close to zero or negative
(subatmospheric) and is not a significant factor affecting filtration versus reabsorp
tion. It can become significant if edema is present or it can affect glomerular
filtration in the kidney (pressure in Bowman’s space is analogous to interstitial
pressure).
Starling Equation
These 4 forces are often referred to as Starling forces. Grouping the forces into those
that favor filtration and those that oppose it, and taking into account the properties
of the barrier to filtration, the formula for fluid exchange is the following:
Qf: fluid movement
Qf = k [(Pc + πIF) − (PIF + πC)]
k: filtration coefficient
The filtration coefficient depends upon a number of factors, but for our purposes
permeability is most important. As indicated below, a variety of factors can
increase permeability of the capillary resulting in a large flux of fluid from the
capillary into the interstitial space.
A positive value of Qf indicates net filtration; a negative value indicates net
absorption. In some tissues (e.g., renal glomerulus), filtration occurs along the
entire length of the capillary; in others (intestinal mucosa), absorption normally
occurs along the whole length. In other tissues, filtration may occur at the proxi
mal end until the forces equilibrate.
Lymphatics
The lymphatics play a pivotal role in maintaining a low interstitial fluid volume
and protein content. Lymphatic flow is directly proportional to interstitial fluid
pressure, thus a rise in this pressure promotes fluid movement out of the intersti
tium via the lymphatics.
12
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 12 15/10/22 2:19P
CHAPTER 1 | FLUID DISTRIBUTION AND EDEMA
The lymphatics also remove proteins from the interstitium. Recall that the lym
phatics return their fluid and protein content to the general circulation by coalesc
ing into the lymphatic ducts, which in turn empty into to the subclavian veins.
Review Questions
1. Given the following values, calculate a net pressure:
PC 25 mm Hg
PIF 2 mm Hg
πC 20 mm Hg
πIF 1 mm Hg
2. Calculate a net pressure if the interstitial hydrostatic pressure is –2 mm Hg.
Answers
1. +4 mm Hg
2. +8 mm Hg
EDEMA (PATHOLOGY INTEGRATION)
Edema is the accumulation of fluid in the interstitial space. It expresses itself in
peripheral tissues in 2 forms:
• In pitting edema (classic, most common), pressing the affected area with a
finger or thumb results in a visual indentation of the skin that persists for
some time after the digit is removed. It generally responds well to diuretic
therapy.
• In non pitting edema, a persistent visual indentation is absent when
pressing the affected area. This occurs when interstitial oncotic forces are
elevated (proteins for example). It does not respond well to diuretic
therapy.
Peripheral Edema
Significant alterations in the Starling forces, which then tip the balance toward
filtration, increase capillary permeability (k) and/or interrupt lymphatic function,
resulting in edema. Thus:
• Increased capillary hydrostatic pressure (PC): causes can include marked
increase in blood flow (e.g., vasodilation in a given vascular bed); increas
ing venous pressure (e.g., venous obstruction or heart failure); and elevated
blood volume, typically the result of Na+ retention (e.g., heart failure).
• Increased interstitial oncotic pressure (πIF): primarily caused by thyroid
dysfunction (elevated mucopolysaccharides in the interstitium) but can be
a result of lymphedema. The elevated amount of solutes act as osmotic
agents resulting in fluid accumulation and a non pitting edema.
13
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 13 15/10/22 2:19P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART I | FLUID DISTRIBUTION AND EDEMA
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
• Decreased vascular oncotic pressure (πC): causes can include liver failure
and nephrotic syndrome.
• Increased capillary permeability (k): Circulating agents, e.g., tumor
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences necrosis factor alpha (TNF alpha), bradykinin, histamine, cytokines
related to burn trauma, etc., increase fluid (and possibly protein) filtration
resulting in edema.
• Lymphatic obstruction/removal (lymphedema): causes can
include filarial (W. bancrofti: elephantiasis); bacterial lymphangitis
Microbiology
(streptococci); trauma; surgery; and tumor. Given that one function
of the lymphatics is to clear interstitial proteins, lymphedema can produce
a non pitting edema because of the rise in πIF.
Pulmonary Edema
Edema in the interstitium of the lung can result in grave consequences. It can
interfere with gas exchange, thus causing hypoxemia and hypercapnia. A low
hydrostatic pressure in pulmonary capillaries and lymphatic drainage helps to
“protect” the lungs against edema.
However, similar to peripheral edema, alterations in Starling forces, capillary
permeability, and/or lymphatic blockage can result in pulmonary edema. The most
common causes relate to elevated capillary hydrostatic pressure and increased
capillary permeability.
• Cardiogenic (elevated PC) (more common)
– Increased left atrial pressure increases venous pressure, which in turn
increases capillary pressure
– Initially increased lymph flow reduces interstitial proteins and is
protective
– First patient sign is often orthopnea (dyspnea when supine), which can
be relieved when sitting upright
– Elevated pulmonary wedge pressure provides confirmation
– Treatment: reduce left atrial pressure, e.g., diuretic therapy
• Non cardiogenic (increased permeability): adult respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS)
– Due to direct injury of the alveolar epithelium or after a primary injury
to the capillary endothelium
– Clinical signs are severe dyspnea of rapid onset, hypoxemia, and diffuse
pulmonary infiltrates leading to respiratory failure
– Most common causes are sepsis, bacterial pneumonia, trauma, and
gastric aspirations
– Fluid accumulation as a result of the loss of epithelial integrity
– Presence of protein containing fluid in the alveoli inactivates surfactant
causing reduced lung compliance
– Pulmonary wedge pressure is normal or low
14
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 14 15/10/22 2:19P
CHAPTER 1 | FLUID DISTRIBUTION AND EDEMA
VOLUME MEASUREMENT OF COMPARTMENTS
To measure the volume of a body compartment, a tracer substance must be easily
measured, well distributed within that compartment, and not rapidly metabolized
or removed from that compartment. Use the relationship V = A/C to calculate the
volume of the compartment:
______________________A_m_o_u_n_t________o_f__tracer
Volume of the compartment =
Concentration of tracer in the compartment
to be measured
For example, 300 mg of a dye is injected intravenously; at equilibrium, the
concentration in the blood is 0.05 mg/mL. The volume of the compartment that
_____3_0_0____mg
contained the dye is volume = = 6,000 mL.
0.05 mg / mL
This is called the volume of distribution (VOD).
Properties of the Tracer and Compartment Measured
Tracers are generally introduced into the vascular compartment, and they distrib
ute throughout body water until they reach a barrier they cannot penetrate. The 2
major barriers encountered are capillary membranes and cell membranes. Thus,
tracer characteristics for the measurement of the various compartments are as
follows:
• Plasma: tracer not permeable to capillary membranes, e.g., albumin
• ECF: tracer permeable to capillary membranes but not cell membranes,
e.g., inulin, mannitol, sodium, sucrose
• Total body water: tracer permeable to capillary and cell membranes, e.g.,
tritiated water, urea
Blood Volume versus Plasma Volume
Blood volume represents the plasma volume plus the volume of RBCs, which is
usually expressed as hematocrit (fractional concentration of RBCs).
The following formula can be utilized to convert plasma volume to blood volume:
_p_l_as_m__a_______volume
Blood volume =
1 − hematocrit
For example, if the hematocrit is 50% (0.50) and plasma volume = 3 L, then:
_ 3 L
Blood volume =
1 − 0.5 = 6 L
If the hematocrit is 0.5 (or 50%), the blood is half RBCs and half plasma. There
fore, blood volume is double the plasma volume.
Blood volume can be estimated by taking 7% of the body weight in kg. For
example, a 70 kg individual has an approximate blood volume of 5.0 L.
15
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 15 15/10/22 2:19P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART I | FLUID DISTRIBUTION AND EDEMA
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
The distribution of intravenously administered fluids is as follows:
• Vascular compartment: whole blood, plasma, dextran in saline
• ECF: saline, mannitol
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
• Total body water: D5W–5% dextrose in water (once the glucose is metabo
lized, the water distributes 2/3 ICF and 1/3 ECF)
Microbiology Recall Question
What is the most likely pathophysiology for cardiogenic pulmonary
edema?
A. Increased pulmonary capillary permeability
B. Decreased vascular oncotic pressure
C. Increased pulmonary capillary hydrostatic pressure
D. Increased interstitial oncotic pressure
E. Lymphatic obstruction
Answer: C
16
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 16 15/10/22 2:19P
PART II
EXCITABLE TISSUE
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 17 15/10/22 2:19P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 18 15/10/22 2:19P
Ionic Equilibrium and
1#
Resting Membrane Potential
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Explain information related to overview of excitable tissue
❏ Interpret scenarios on ion channels
❏ Explain information related to equilibrium potential
EXCITABLE TISSUE
The figure below provides a basic picture of excitable cells and the relative concen
tration of key electrolytes inside versus outside the cell. The intracellular proteins
have a negative charge. In order to understand what governs the conductance of
ions as it relates to the function of excitable tissue (nerves and muscle), remember
the relative difference in concentrations for these ions.
In addition, know the following key principles.
1. Membrane potential (Em): There is a separation of charge across the membrane
of excitability tissue at rest. This separation of charge means there is the poten
tial to do work and is measured in volts. Thus, Em represents the measured value.
2. Electrochemical gradient indicates the combination of 2 forces: ions diffuse
based upon chemical (concentration) gradients (high to low) and electrical gra
dients (like charges repel, opposites attract).
3. Equilibrium potential is the membrane potential that puts an ion in
electrochemical equilibrium, i.e., the membrane potential that results in no NET
diffusion of an ion. If reached, the tendency for an ion to diffuse in one direction
based upon the chemical gradient is countered by the electrical force in the
opposite direction. The equilibrium potential for any ion can be calculated by
the Nernst equation.
4. Conductance (g) refers to the flow of an ion across the cell membrane. Ions
move across the membrane via channels. Open/closed states of channels deter
mine the relative permeability of the membrane to a given ion and thus the
conductance. Open states create high permeability and conductance, while
closed states result in low permeability and conductance.
5. Net force (driving force) indicates the relative “force” driving the diffusion of
an ion. It is estimated by subtracting the ion’s equilibrium potential from the
cell’s membrane potential. In short, it quantitates how far a given ion is from
equilibrium at any membrane potential.
19
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 19 15/10/22 2:19P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART II | EXCITABLE TISSUE
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
[Na+ ]–High
[Cl–]–High
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences [Na+]–Low
[Cl–]–Low
[Ca2+ ]–Low* Pro~t–Em– +
Prot–Prot–Microbiology
[K+ ]–High –70 mV
[Ca2+ ]–High
[K+ ]–Low
cytosolic Prot–*free
concentration
Figure II 1 1. Basic Schematic of an Excitable Cell
Figure II 1 1. Basic Schematic of an Excitable Cell
ION CHANNELS
Ions diffuse across the membrane via ion channels. There are 3 types:
Ungated (Leak) Ion Channel
• Always open
• Direction the ion moves depends upon electrochemical forces
• Important for determining resting membrane potential of a cell
Voltage Gated Ion Channel
• Open/closed state is determined primarily by membrane potential (voltage)
• Change in membrane potential may open or close the channel
Ligand Gated Ion Channel
• Channel contains a receptor
• State of the channel (open or closed) is influenced by the binding of a
ligand to the receptor
• Under most circumstances, the binding of the ligand opens the channel
20
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 20 15/10/22 2:19P
CHAPTER 1 | IONIC EQUILIBRIUM AND RESTING MEMBRANE POTENTIAL
Receptor
Gate: open/closed
for ligand
state dependent on
voltage
Extracellular
+
–
Cytosol
K+
Ungated (leak) Voltage gated Ligand gated
Figure II 1 2. Classes of Ion Channel
Figure II 1 2. Classes of Ion Channels
There is one exception to the 3 classes: the NMDA (N methyl d aspartic acid)
receptor is both voltage and ligand gated.
Na+ Ca2+
Receptor for Receptor for
ligand ligand
Mg2+
K+
If Em is more negative than If Em is less negative than
~ –70 mV, then channel is ~ –70 mV, then Mg2+ block
blocked by Mg2+ .t is removed and ligand
binding opens.
Figure II 1 3. NMDA Receptor
Figure II 1 3. NMDA Receptor
The pore of the NMDA receptor is blocked by Mg2+ if Em is more negative than
~ –70 mV. If Em becomes less negative than ~ –70 mV, this Mg2+ block is removed.
Thus, the NMDA receptor exhibits characteristics of a voltage gated channel.
21
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 21 15/10/22 2:19P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART II | EXCITABLE TISSUE
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
The NMDA receptor also exhibits characteristics of a ligand gated channel.
Glutamate and aspartate are the endogenous ligands for the NMDA receptor.
Binding of one of the ligands is required to open the channel.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences • If Em is more negative than ~ –70 mV, binding of the ligand does not open
the channel (Mg2+ block related to voltage prevents).
• If Em is less negative than ~ –70 mV, binding of the ligand opens the
channel (even though no Mg2+ block at this Em, channel will not open
without ligand binding).
Microbiology
The NMDA receptor is a non selective cation channel (Na+, K+, and Ca2+ flux
through it). Thus, opening of this channel results in depolarization.
Although the NMDA receptor is likely involved in a variety of functions, the most
important are memory and pain transmission. With respect to memory, NMDA
has been shown to be involved in long term potentiation of cells, thought to be an
important component of memory formation. With respect to pain transmission,
NMDA is expressed throughout the CNS and has been proven to play a pivotal
role in the transmission and ultimate perception of pain.
EQUILIBRIUM POTENTIAL
Ex+: equilibrium potential
Equilibrium potential is the membrane potential that puts an ion in electrochemi
[X+]o: concentration outside
cal equilibrium. It can be calculated using the Nernst equation, which computes
(extracellular) the equilibrium potential for any ion based upon the concentration gradient.
[X+]i: concentration inside (intracellular)
___ _[X__+_]_o
EX+ = 60 log10
Z: value of the charge Z [X+]i
Key points regarding the Nernst equation:
• The ion always diffuses in a direction that brings the Em toward its
equilibrium.
• The overall current flow of the ion is directly proportional to the net force
and conductance (determined by ion channel state, i.e., permeability) of
the membrane for the ion.
• The Em moves toward the EX of the most permeable ion.
• The number of ions that actually move across the membrane is negligible.
Thus, opening of ion channels does not alter intracellular or extracellular
concentrations of ions under normal circumstances.
It is difficult to measure the intracellular concentration of the important electro
lytes, so equilibrium potential for these ions will vary. The following are reason
able numbers to keep in mind:
EK+ ~ –95 mV ENa+ ~ +70 mV
ECl–~ –76 mV ECa2 +~ +125 mV
Note that in depolarization, Em becomes less negative (moves toward zero). In
hyperpolarization, Em becomes more negative (further from zero).
22
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 22 15/10/22 2:19P
CHAPTER 1 | IONIC EQUILIBRIUM AND RESTING MEMBRANE POTENTIAL
Resting Membrane Potential
Potassium (K+)
There is marked variability in the resting membrane potential (rEm) for excitable
tissues, but the following generalizations are applicable.
• rEm for nerves is ~ –70 mV, while rEm for striated muscle is ~ –90 mV.
• Excitable tissue has a considerable number of leak channels for K+, but not
for Cl–, Na+, or Ca2+. Thus, K+ conductance (g) is high in resting cells.
• Because of this high conductance, rEm is altered in the following ways by
changes in the extracellular concentration of K+:
– Hyperkalemia depolarizes the cell. If acute, excitability of nerves is
increased (nerve is closer to threshold for an action potential), and
heart arrhythmias may occur.
– Hypokalemia hyperpolarizes the cell. This decreases the excitability of
nerves (further from threshold), and heart arrhythmias may occur.
K+ K+ leak K+ K+ leak
channel channel
K+ K+
K+ K+ K+ K+
K+ K+
K+ – + K+ – +
K+ K+
Em ~ Em ~
–70 mV –70 mV
K+ K+ K+ K+
Hyperkalemia: Depolarizes Hypokalemia: Hyperpolarizes
Figure II 1 4. EffecFtigureof CIIha1nge4s. EffectinofECxhtraancgeellsular in ExtracKel+lulaorn ReKst+ingon RestMinegmbrane Potential
Membrane Potential
Altering the g for K+ has the following effects:
• Increasing g causes K+ to leave the cell, resulting in hyperpolarization of
the cell. Recall that increasing g for an ion causes the Em to move toward
the equilibrium potential for that ion. Thus, the cell will move from
–70 mV toward –95 mV.
• Decreasing g depolarizes the cell (cell moves away from K+ equilibrium).
This applies to K+ because of its high resting g.
23
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 23 15/10/22 2:19P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART II | EXCITABLE TISSUE
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
The Na+/K+ ATPase
Although the cell membrane is relatively impermeable to Na+, it is not completely
impervious to it. Thus, some Na+ does leak into excitable cells. This Na+ leak into
the cells is counterbalanced by pumping it back out via the Na+/K+ ATPase.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Important attributes of this pump are as follows:
Intracellular Extracellular
Microbiology
Na Leak
Na Pump
K Pump
K Diffusion
Figure IFIig1ure5. SteadIyI 1Sta5t.e StReaedsyting ReSlattaitoenship Restibnegtween ReIolantionDshififpusion andbeNtwa/eKen ATPase Pump
Ion Diffusion and Na/K ATPase Pump
• The stoichiometry is 3 Na+ out, 2 K+ in. This means the pump is electro
genic because more positive charges are removed from inside
the cell than are replaced. This helps maintain a negative charge inside the
cell.
• Three solutes are pumped out in exchange for 2 solutes. This causes a net
flux of water out of the cell. This pump is important for volume regulation
of excitable tissue.
Chloride (Cl–)
Cl− g is low at rest. Thus, decreasing g or changing the extracellular concentration
has minimal effect on rEm.
Assuming rEm is –70 mV, increasing Cl–g hyperpolarizes the cell (Em moves
toward equilibrium for Cl–, which is −76 mV). If rEm is −80 mV or more negative,
increasing Cl− g depolarizes the cell.
Sodium (Na+)
Na+ g is very low at rest. Thus, decreasing g or changing the extracellular concen
tration has no effect on rEm. Increasing Na+ g depolarizes the cell (Em moves to
equilibrium for Na+, which is +70 mV).
24
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 24 15/10/22 2:19P
CHAPTER 1 | IONIC EQUILIBRIUM AND RESTING MEMBRANE POTENTIAL
channel Na+ Na+ channel
Na+ Na+ Na+
Na+
Na+ Na+
Na+
Cl–Cl–Cl–Cl–Cl–Cl–Cl–Cl–Na+ Na+
Na+
Na+
Cl–Cl––+ Na+ Na+ – +
Cl–Em ~ Em ~
–70 mV –70 mV
ECl–~ –76 mV Cl–ENa+ ~ +70 mV
Increasing Cl–g Hyperpolarizes Increasing Na+ g Depolarizes
FigureFigureII 1II61. 6E.ffEecftfectofofInIcnrceraesaesded Cl–g g(le(lfet)ft) ororNaN+a+g (grigh(rti)ght)
Calcium (Ca2+)
Ca2+ g is very low at rest. Thus decreasing g or changing the extracellular concentra
tion has no effect on rEm. Increasing Ca2+ g depolarizes the cell (Em moves toward
equilibrium for Ca2+, which is +125 mV).
Recall Question
Which of the following is the mechanism of action behind heart
arrhythmias caused by hyperkalemia?
A. Increased potassium hyperpolarizes the cell
B. Increased potassium prolongs action potential duration
C. Increased potassium increases heart rate via funny current
channels
D. Increased potassium depolarizes the cell bringing excitable
nerves closer to action potential
E. Increased potassium increases intracellular calcium concentration
Answer: D
25
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 25 15/10/22 2:19P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 26 15/10/22 2:19P
The Neuron Action Potential and
2#
Synaptic Transmission
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Explain information related to overview of the action potential
❏ Solve problems concerning voltage gated ion channels
❏ Demonstrate understanding of the action potential
❏ Use knowledge of properties of action potentials
❏ Answer questions about synaptic transmission
❏ Interpret scenarios on review and integration
ACTION POTENTIAL
The action potential is a rapid depolarization followed by a repolarization (return NOTE
of membrane potential to rest). The function is:
The action potential of neurons is discussed
• Neurons: to conduct neuronal signals in this chapter; however, since the action
• Muscle: to initiate a contraction potential of skeletal muscle is virtually the
same, apply the same rules. Because the
The figure below shows the action potential from 3 types of excitable cell. Even
cardiac muscle action potential has several
though there are many similarities in the cell types, there are differences—most
differences, it will be discussed in the next
notably, the duration of the action potential.
chapter.
Note the different time scales.
Motor neuron Skeletal muscle Cardiac ventricle
30
20
10
0
−10 Note the different
(mV
−20 time scales
2 msec 5 msec 200 msec
Em −30
−40
−50
−60
−70
−80
−90
Figure IIFig2ure1.IIAc2tio1n. ActioPnotenPtioatlesntials ffrroomm 33CellVerTteybpreaste Cell Types
(Redrawn from Flickinger, C.J., etal.: Medical Cell Biology, Philadelphia, 1979,
W.B. Saunders Co.)
27
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 27 15/10/22 2:19PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART II | EXCITABLE TISSUE
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
VOLTAGE GATED ION CHANNELS
To understand how the action potential is generated, the ion channels involved
must be discussed.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Voltage Gated (Fast) Na+ Channels
The opening of these channels is responsible for the rapid depolarization
phase (upstroke) of the action potential. The fast Na+ channel has 2 gates and
Microbiology
3 conformational states.
Activation Closed Open Inactivated
gate (Rest) (Activated)
Extracellular
+
Cytosol –
Inactivation
gate
Typical transition of states
Closed Open
Inactivated
(Rest) (Activated)
This transition
cannot occur
Repolarization
Figure FiguIrIe 2 II2.2V2o.ltagVeoltage GGaatetedd (F(aFsta)st) Na+NCah+anneClhannel
• Closed: In the closed state, the activation gate (m gate) is closed and the
CLINICAL CORRELATE
inactivation gate (h gate) is open. Because the activation gate is closed,
Hyperkalemia depolarizes neurons. Acutely, Na+ conductance (g) is low.
this increases excitability because the cell is • Open: Depolarization causes the channel to transition to the open state, in
closer to threshold. However, this which both gates are open and thus Na+ g increases. The elevated Na+ g
causes further depolarization, which in turn opens
depolarization opens some fast Na+
more Na+ channels, causing further depolarization. In short, a positive
channels. Over time, these channels
feedback cycle can be initiated if enough Na+ channels open at or near the
transition into the inactivated state. Because
same time. Bear in mind, there are numerous fast Na+ channels in every
Em never returns to its original resting Em cell, and each one has its own threshold voltage for opening.
(hyperkalemia keeps cell depolarized), the
• Inactivated: After opening, the fast Na+ channel typically transitions to
fast Na+ channel is unable to transition back
the inactivated state. In this state, the activation gate is open and the
to the closed state and is thus “locked” in inactivation gate (h gate) is closed. Under normal circumstances, this
the inactivated state. This reduces the occurs when membrane potential becomes positive as a result of the action
number of fast Na+ channels available to potential.
open, resulting in the reduced neuronal • Once the cell repolarizes, the fast Na+ channel transitions back to the
excitability seen with chronic hyperkalemia. closed state, and is thus ready to reopen to cause another action potential.
28
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 28 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 2 | THE NEURON ACTION POTENTIAL AND SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION
Once an Na+ channel inactivates, it cannot go back to the open state until it
transitions to the closed state (typically when the cell repolarizes). There are some
conditions in which the transition to the closed state does not occur.
Extracellular Ca2+ blocks fast Na+ channels.
Voltage Gated K+ Channels
• Closed at resting membrane potential
• Depolarization opens, but kinetics are much slower than fast Na+ channels
• Primary mechanism for repolarization
THE ACTION POTENTIAL BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
Tetrodotoxin (TTX), saxitoxin (STX), and local
Subthreshold Stimulus anesthetics (“ caine drugs”) block fast Na+
channels, thereby preventing an action
In the figure below, the blue and purple lines show changes in membrane potential
(Em) to increasing levels of stimuli, but neither result in an action potential. Thus, potential.
these are subthreshold stimuli.
• The degree of depolarization is related to the magnitude of the
BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
stimulus.
Ciguatoxin (CTX: fish) and batrachotoxin
• The membrane repolarizes (returns to rest).
(BTX: frogs) are toxins that block inactivation
• It can summate, which means if another stimulus is applied before
of fast Na+ channels.
repolarization is complete, the depolarization of the second stimulus adds
onto the depolarization of the first (the 2 depolarizations sum together).
(mV
+60
Potential
0
Membrane Overshoot
Threshold Subthreshold responses
Hyperpolarization
−70
0 1 2 3 4 5
Current Time (msec)
Increasing
Stimulating Stimulus
0
Strength
Figure II 2 3. The Neuron Action Potential
Figure II2 3. Neuron Action Potential
29
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 29 15/10/22 2:20PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART II | EXCITABLE TISSUE
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Threshold Stimulus
The green line in the figure depicts the action potential. Provided the initial
stimulus is great enough to depolarize the neuron to threshold, then an action
potential results. The following represents the events that occur during an
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
action potential, which is an application of the aforementioned discussion on
ion channels.
• At threshold, a critical mass of fast Na+ channels open, resulting in further
Microbiology depolarization and the opening of more fast Na+ channels.
• Because Na+ g is high (see also Figure II 2 4), the Em potential rapidly
approaches the equilibrium potential for Na+ (~ +70 mV).
• As membrane potential becomes positive, fast Na+ channels begin
to inactivate (see above), resulting in a rapid reduction in Na+
conductance (see also Figure II 2 4).
• Voltage gated K+ channels open in response to the depolarization,
but since their kinetics are much slower, the inward Na+ current (upstroke
of the action potential) dominates initially.
• K+ g begins to rise as more channels open. As the rise in Em approaches its
peak, fast Na+ channels are inactivating, and now the neuron has a high
K+ g and a low Na+ g (see also Figure II 2 4).
• The high K+ g drives Em toward K+ equilibrium (~ −95 mV), resulting
in a rapid repolarization.
• As Em becomes negative, K+ channels begin to close, and K+ g slowly
returns to its original level. However, because of the slow kinetics,
a period of hyperpolarization occurs.
Key Points
• The upstroke of the action potential is mediated by a Na+ current
(fast Na+ channels).
• Although the inactivation of fast Na+ channels participates in
repolarization, the dominant factor is the high K+ g due to the opening of
voltage gated K+ channels.
• The action potential is all or none: It occurs if threshold is reached, and
doesn’t occur if threshold is not reached.
• The action potential cannot summate.
• Under normal conditions, the action potential regenerates itself as it
moves down the axon, thus it is propagated (magnitude is unchanged).
30
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 30 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 2 | THE NEURON ACTION POTENTIAL AND SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION
+80
ENa V=Membrane potential (action potential)
gNa=Sodium ion conductance
gK=Potassium ion conductance
(mmh/cm 30 2) V
Em(mV
gNa
20
Conductance
10 gK
−70
EK
0 1 2 3 4
Time (msec)
Figure II2 4. Axon Action PoFteingtuiarel IIa2nd4. ACxhoanngeAsction iPnotenCtoianlductananced Changes in Conductance
PROPERTIES OF ACTION POTENTIALS
Refractory Periods
The absolute refractory period is the period during which no matter how strong the
stimulus, it cannot induce a second action potential. The mechanism underlying this is
the fact that during this time, most fast Na+ channels are either open or in the inacti
vated state. The approximate duration of the absolute refractory period is seen below;
the length of this period determines the maximum frequency of action potentials.
The relative refractory period is that period during which a greater than thresh
old stimulus is required to induce a second action potential. The mechanism for
this is the elevated K+ g.
Absolute Relative
refractory refractory
period period
+50
mV
0
−70
0 1 2 3 4
Time (msec)
Figure II2 5. Refractory Periods
Figure II 2 5. Refractory Periods
31
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 31 15/10/22 2:20PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART II | EXCITABLE TISSUE
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY Conduction Velocity of the Action Potential
Multiple sclerosis (MS) and Guillain Barre There are 2 primary factors influencing conduction velocity in nerves:
syndrome (GBS) are demyelinating diseases.
• Cell diameter: The greater the cell diameter, the greater the
PathologLyoss of myelin results inBechuarvrieonrtaSlcienlceea/kSaogceiaSlciences
conduction velocity. A greater cross sectional surface area reduces the
across the membrane. The magnitude of internal electrical resistance.
current reaching the cluster of fast Na+
• Myelination: Myelin provides a greater electrical resistance across the cell
channels is unable to cause threshold
membrane, thereby reducing current “leak” through the membrane. The
Microbiolodgeypolarization, resulting in a conduction myelination is interrupted at the nodes of Ranvier where fast Na+ channels
block. MS preferentially demyelinates cluster. Thus, the action potential appears to “bounce” from node to node
neurons in the CNS, while GBS acts on with minimal decrement and greater speed (saltatory conduction).
peripheral neurons.
SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION
NOTE Neuromuscular Junction
The basics of neurotransmitter release The synapse between the axons of an alpha motor neuron and a skeletal muscle
described in this section are applicable to fiber is called the neuromuscular junction (NMJ). The terminals of alpha motor
synaptic transmission for all synapses. neurons contain acetylcholine (Ach), thus the synaptic transmission at the
neuromuscular junction is one example of cholinergic transmission.
Ca2+
Presynaptic
Ca2+ membrane
Postsynaptic
membrane
Synaptic cleft ACh
(skeletal muscle)
ECF
Na+ K+
ICF (EPP) Ligand gated
channel
Figure II 2 6.FigNuerueromuIsIcu2lar6. NeuromuscuTlraarnsmissioTnransmission andand NiNcoictointiincic SySnyanpaspesses
Sequence of events
1. The action potential traveling down the motor neuron depolarizes the
presynaptic membrane.
2. This depolarization opens voltage gated Ca2+ channels in the presynaptic
membrane, resulting in Ca2+ influx into the presynaptic terminal.
32
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 32 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 2 | THE NEURON ACTION POTENTIAL AND SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION
3. The rise in Ca2+ causes synaptic vesicles to release their contents, in this case,
Ach. The amount of neurotransmitter release is directly related to the rise in
cytosolic Ca2+, i.e., the more Ca2+ that enters, the more neurotransmitter
released.
4. Ach binds to a nicotinic receptor located on the muscle membrane (NM
receptor). The NM receptor is a non selective monovalent cation channel
(both Na+ and K+ can traverse). Given that Na+ has a much greater net force
(see Chapter 1 of this section), depolarization occurs. This depolarization is
called an end plate potential (EPP). The magnitude of the EPP is directly
related to the amount of Ach released.
5. The resulting depolarization opens fast Na+ channels on the muscle membrane
(sarcolemma) causing an action potential in the sarcolemma. Under normal
circumstances, an action potential in the motor neuron releases enough Ach
to cause an EPP that is at least threshold for the action potential in the skel
etal muscle cell. In other words, there is a one to one relationship between an
action potential in the motor neuron and an action potential in the skeletal
muscle cell.
6. The actions of Ach are terminated by acetylcholinesterase (AchE), an enzyme
located on the postsynaptic membrane that breaks down Ach into choline and
acetate. Choline is taken back into the presynaptic terminal (reuptake), hence
providing substrate for re synthesis of Ach.
Synapses Between Neurons
The figure below illustrates synaptic junctions between neurons. In general, the
synaptic potentials produced are excitatory or inhibitory, and they are produced by
ligand gated ion channels.
• Synapses are located on the cell body and dendrites.
• The currents produced at these synapses travel along the dendritic and cell
body membranes.
• The axon hillock–initial segment region has a high density of fast Na+
channels and is the origin for the action potential of the axon.
• The closer the synapse is to this region, the greater its influence in
determining whether an action potential is generated.
• If the sum of all the inputs reaches threshold, an action potential is
generated and conducted along the axon to the nerve terminals.
33
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 33 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART II | EXCITABLE TISSUE
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Dendrites
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Initial Myelin Vesicles of
segment sheath transmitter
Microbiology
Axon hillock Axon
Synaptic buttons
FigureFigurIeI2 7II.2Sy7n.apsSeynapseTransTmrainsssimonission bebtweteweenen NNeeuurroonnss
Excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) is excitatory if it increases the excitabil
ity of the postsynaptic neuron, i.e., it is more likely to fire an action potential. It is
primarily the result of increased Na+ g. It is similar to the EPP found at the
neuromuscular junction.
• Important receptors that produce:
– Nicotinic: endogenous ligand is Ach and includes NM and NN.
– Non NMDA (N methyl D aspartic acid): endogenous ligands are
glutamate and aspartate (excitatory amino acid transmitters), and Na+ g
is increased when they bind.
– NMDA: endogenous ligands are the excitatory amino acids, and it is a
non selective cation channel (discussed in the preceding chapter).
Inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP) is inhibitory if it decreases the excitabil
ity of the postsynaptic neuron, i.e., it is less likely to fire an action potential. It is
primarily the result of increased Cl− g.
• Important receptors that produce:
– GABAA&C: endogenous ligand is GABA (gamma aminobutyric acid)
– Glycine: endogenous ligand is glycine
Electrical Synapses
In contrast to chemical synaptic transmission, in electrical synapses there is a
direct flow of current from cell to cell. The cell to cell communication occurs via
gap junctions; because the cells are electrically coupled, there is no synaptic
delay. Cardiac and single unit smooth muscle cells have these electrical synapses.
34
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 34 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 2 | THE NEURON ACTION POTENTIAL AND SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION
Peripheral Nervous System
Motor
Alpha motor neurons release Ach, which binds to the NM (nicotinic muscle)
receptor. These are large, well myelinated neurons, i.e., they exhibit fast
conduction.
Parasympathetic nervous system
Preganglionic neurons release Ach, which binds to NN (nicotinic neuronal)
receptor. Postganglionic fibers release Ach, which binds to muscarinic receptor (G
protein coupled).
Sympathetic nervous system
Preganglionic neurons release Ach, which binds to NN receptor.
Postganglionic neurons (most) release norepinephrine (NE), which binds to alpha
and beta (β 1 & β 3) receptors (G protein coupled).
Figure II 2 8. Peripheral Nervous System
REVIEW AND INTEGRATION
In this section, we review much of the preceding information and add in appli
cable new information as it pertains to clinical signs indicative of alterations in the
normal physiological function just discussed. These are clinical signs intended to
help further reinforce the important physiology and thus aid the student in
recognizing possible causes of these clinical signs.
This is not intended to fully represent all the specific signs/symptoms related to
each and every condition indicated.
35
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 35 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART II | EXCITABLE TISSUE
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY Decreased Neuronal Excitability/Conduction
Botulinum toxin is a protease that destroys Clinical signs could include: weakness; ataxia; hyporeflexia; paralysis; sensory
proteins needed for the fusion and release deficit. Possible causes include the following:
Pathologoyf synaptic vesicles. ThisBethoaxviinoraSltcairegnectes/SociaSlciences
Table II 2 1.
cholinergic neurons, resulting in flaccid
paralysis. Ion Loss of Toxins/Drugs NMJ
Disturbances Neurons/
Microbiology Demyelination
BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
Hypokalemia Guillain Barre Local anesthetics Depolarizing NM
Latrotoxin, the venom from the black widow
(“caine” drugs) blockers
spider, opens presynaptic Ca2+ channels,
Chronic Amyotrophic TTX Non depolarizing
resulting in excess Ach release.
hyperkalemia lateral sclerosis NM blockers
(ALS)
BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY Hypercalcemia Aging STX Lambert Eaton
Many pesticides, as well as some Myasthenia
therapeutic agents, block AchE, resulting in gravis
the prolonged action of Ach in cholinergic
Botulinum
synapses.
Increased Neuronal Excitability/Conduction
Clinical signs could include hyperreflexia, spasms, muscle fasciculations,
tetany, tremors, paresthesias, and convulsions. Possible causes include the following:
Table II 2 2.
Ion Loss of Toxins/Drugs NMJ
Disturbances Neurons/
Demyelination
BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
Acute hyperkalemia Multiple CTX AchE inhibitors
Avariety of compounds can block NM
sclerosis
receptors (non depolarizing neuromuscular
Hypocalcemia BTX Latrotoxin
blockers), while succinylcholine binds to this
receptor, causing the channel to remain
open (depolarizing neuromuscular blocker).
Recall Question
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY
Which of the following represents the pathologic alteration causing
Two important pathologies related to
myasthenia gravis?
neuromuscular junctions are myasthenia
gravis and Lambert Eaton syndrome. The A. Autoimmune with antibodies that block postsynaptic Nm receptors
most common form of myasthenia gravis is
B. Antibodies blocking the presynaptic voltage gated Ca2+ channels
an autoimmune condition in which
C. Opening of presynaptic Ca2+ channels resulting in excess ACh release
antibodies are created that block the NM
receptor. Lambert Eaton is also an D. Toxins that block inactivation of fast Na+ channels
autoimmune condition, but the antibodies
E. Demyelination of Schwann cells
block the presynaptic voltage gated Ca2+
channels.
Answer: A
36
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 36 15/10/22 2:20P
3#
Electrical Activity of the Heart
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Use knowledge of properties of cardiac tissue
❏ Answer questions about cardiac action potentials
❏ Use knowledge of control of nodal excitability
❏ Answer questions about electrocardiology
❏ Explain information related to arrhythmias/ECG alterations
PROPERTIES OF CARDIAC TISSUE
Cells within the heart are specialized for different functional roles. In general,
these specializations are for automaticity, conduction, and/or contraction.
Automaticity
Cardiac cells initiate action potentials spontaneously. Further, the cells are
electrically coupled via gap junctions. Thus, when a cell fires an action potential, it
typically sweeps throughout the heart. Although all cardiac tissue shows spontane
ous depolarization, only the following 3 are germane.
• Sinoatrial (SA) node cells are specialized for automaticity. They spontane
ously depolarize to threshold and have the highest intrinsic rhythm (rate),
making them the pacemaker in the normal heart.
Their intrinsic rate is ~100/min.
• Atrioventricular (AV) node cells have the second highest intrinsic
rhythm (40 60/min). Often, these cells become the pacemaker if SA node
cells are damaged.
• Although not “specialized” for automaticity per se, Purkinje cells do
exhibit spontaneous depolarizations with a rate of ~35/min.
Conduction
All cardiac tissue conducts electrical impulses, but the following are particularly
specialized for this function.
• AV node: These cells are specialized for slow conduction. They have small
diameter fibers, a low density of gap junctions, and the rate of depolariza
tion (phase 0, see below) is slow in comparison to tissue that conducts fast.
37
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 37 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART II | EXCITABLE TISSUE
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
• Purkinje cells: These cells are specialized for rapid conduction. Their
diameter is large, they express many gap junctions, and the rate of
depolarization (phase 0, see below) is rapid. These cells constitute the
HIS Purkinje system of the ventricles.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Contraction
Although myocytes have a spontaneous depolarization and they conduct electrical
impulses, they contain the protein machinery to contract.
Microbiology
Conduction Pathway
Because cells are electrically coupled via gap junctions, excitation to threshold of
one cell typically results in the spread of this action potential throughout the heart.
In the normal heart, the SA node is the pacemaker because it has the highest
intrinsic rhythm.
The normal conduction pathway for the heart is as follows:
atrial muscle
SA node internodal fibers AV node (delay) Purkinje fibers ventricular muscle
CARDIAC ACTION POTENTIALS
Resting Membrane Potential (Non Nodal Cells)
Potassium conductance is high in resting ventricular or atrial myocytes. This is
also true for Purkinje cells. Because of this, resting membrane potential is close to
K+ equilibrium potential. This high resting K+ conductance is the result of 2 types
of channels.
Ungated potassium channels
Always open, and unless the membrane potential reaches the potassium equilib
rium potential (~ –95 mV), a potassium flux (efflux) is maintained through these
channels.
Inward K+ rectifying channels (IK1)
• Voltage gated channels that are open at rest
• Depolarization closes
• Open again as the membrane begins to repolarize
Action Potential (Non Nodal Cells)
Understanding the ionic basis of cardiac action potentials is important for
understanding both cardiac physiology and the electrocardiogram (ECG), which is
a recording of the currents produced by these ionic changes. In addition, antiar
rhythmic drugs exert their effects by binding to the channels that produce these
ionic currents.
38
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 38 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 3 | ELECTRICAL ACTIVITY OF THE HEART
In this section, we review the various phases of the action potentials that occur in
myocytes and Purkinje cells. Action potentials generated by nodal cells (SA and
AV) are discussed later. Although there are slight differences in the action poten
tials generated by atrial and ventricular myocytes, as well as Purkinje cells, these
differences are not included here.
Furthermore, remember that cardiac cells are electrically coupled by gap junctions.
Thus, when a cell fires an action potential, it spreads and is conducted by neigh
boring cells.
The figure below shows the labeled phases of the action potential from a ventricu
lar myocyte and the predominant ionic currents related to the various phases.
+20 1
2
0
−20
Membrane Potential −40 0 3
(mV)
−60
−80 4
−100
High
Na+ Conductance
Low
High
Ca2+ Conductance
Low
High
IK1 Current
Low
High
IKR Current
Low
0 100 200 300 400
Time (msec)
Figure II 3 1. Action Potential in a Ventricular Myocyte
Figure II3 1. Action Potential in a Ventricular Myocyte
39
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 39 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART II | EXCITABLE TISSUE
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Phase 0
• Upstroke of the action potential
• Similar to nerve and skeletal muscle, mediated by the opening of voltage
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences gated, fast Na+ channels (note high Na+ conductance)
• Conduction velocity is directly related to rate of change in potential
(slope). Stimulation of β 1 receptors, e.g., epinephrine and norepinephrine,
increases the slope and thus increases conduction velocity.
Microbiology • Creates the QRS complex of the ECG
BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
Phase 1
Class Iantiarrhythmic agents block fast Na+ • Slight repolarization mediated by a transient potassium current
channels, resulting in a change in phase 0.
• Sodium channels transition to the inactivated state (note reduction in Na+
Blocking these channels reduces conduction conductance).
velocity, an action that can be beneficial,
e.g., use of lidocaine to reduce conduction
Phase 2 (plateau)
and stabilize the heart when the tissue
• Depolarization opens voltage gated Ca2+ channels (primarily L type) and
becomes ischemic.
voltage gated K+ channels (IKR current being one example).
• The inward Ca2+ current offset by the outward K+ current results in little
change in membrane potential (plateau).
• The influx of Ca2+ triggers the release of Ca2+ from the SR (Ca2+ induced
BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY Ca2+ release), resulting in cross bridge cycling and muscle contraction (see
next chapter).
Class III antiarrhythmic drugs block K+
channels. This delays repolarization, resulting • Creates the ST segment of the ECG
in a long QT interval. • The long duration of the action potential prevents tetany in cardiac muscle
(see next chapter).
Phase 3
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY
• Repolarization phase
Note that Na+ conductance during phase 2
• L type channels begin closing, but rectifying K+ currents (IKR current
is still slightly elevated. Some of these
being one example) still exist, resulting in repolarization.
channels are very slow to inactivate and
• IK1 channels reopen and aid in repolarization.
data suggest that genetic alterations can
result in a significant Na+ current during • Creates the T wave of the EKG
phase 2. This Na+ current delays
repolarization, resulting in a prolonged QT.
Phase 4
This genetic alteration appears to play a role
• Resting membrane potential
in congenital long QT syndrome.
• Fast Na+, L type Ca2+, and rectifying K+ channels (IKR) close, but IK1
Aprolonged QT interval can cause a form of channels remain open.
ventricular tachycardia known as torsade de
pointes. Other factors can increase the QT
interval, thus possibly producing torsade de
pointes.
40
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 40 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 3 | ELECTRICAL ACTIVITY OF THE HEART
Action Potential (Nodal Cells)
Nodal tissue (SA and AV) lacks fast Na+ channels. Thus, the upstroke of the action
potential is mediated by a Ca2+ current rather than an Na+ current. In addition,
note that phases 1 and 2 are absent.
(mV 0
Potential−20 0
Threshold
3
−40
Electrical 4
−60
−80
600 msec
FigureFigure IIII3322.. SSAANodNaoldal(Pacem(Pakaecre)maker)Action PoteAnctitaioln Potential
Phase 4
• Resting membrane potential
• Given that this tissue is specialized for automaticity, these cells show a
spontaneous depolarization at rest (called the “pacemaker” potential) that
results from the following:
– Inward Ca2+ current: Primarily related to T type Ca2+ channels. These
differ from the L type in that they open at a more negative membrane
potential (~ −70 mV).
– Inward Na+ current: This inward Na+ current is referred to
as the “funny” current (If) and the channel involved is a
hyperpolarization activated cyclic nucleotide gated (HCN) channel.
HCN are non selective monovalent cation channels and thus conduct
both Na+ and K+. However, opening of these channels evokes a sodium
mediated depolarization (similar to nicotinic receptors, see previous
chapter). These channels open when the membrane repolarizes (nega
tive membrane potential), and they close in response to the depolariza
tion of the action potential.
– Outward K+ current: There is a reduced outward K+ current as the cell
repolarizes after the action potential. Reducing this current helps to
produce the pacemaker potential.
41
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 41 15/10/22 2:20PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART II | EXCITABLE TISSUE
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Phase 0
• Upstroke of the action potential
• Mediated by opening of L type (primarily) Ca2+ channels
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
• Note the time scale: the slope of phase 0 is not steep in nodal tissue like it
is in ventricular myocytes or the upstroke of the action potential in nerves.
This is part of the reason conduction velocity is slow in the AV node.
Microbiology
Phase 3
• Repolarization phase
• Mediated by voltage gated K+ channels
CONTROL OF NODAL EXCITABILITY
BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
Class IIantiarrhythmics are the
Catecholamines
beta blockers, while class IV antiarrhythmics
are the Ca2+ channel blocks. These drugs
(mV
reduce automaticity and conduction through
0
the AVnode and can be very efficacious in Potential
tachyarrhythmias. –20
–40 NE
Electrical
–60
–80
Figure FIiIgur3e 3.IIS3ym3p.atSheytmicpathetic EEffffeeccttss on oSnA NSoAdal NCoedlalsl Cells
• Norepinephrine (NE) from postganglionic sympathetic nerve terminals
BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
and circulating epinephrine (Epi)
Ivabradine blocks the funny current in the SA
• β 1 receptors; Gs—cAMP; stimulates opening of HCN and Ca2+ channels
node, thereby reducing HR. It has the
• Increased slope of pacemaker potential (gets to threshold sooner)
following uses:
• Functional effect
• For systolic heart failure when beta
– Positive chronotropy (SA node): increased HR
blockers fail to reduce HR sufficiently
– Positive dromotropy (AV node): increased conduction velocity through
• For idiopathic sinus tachycardia
the AV node
42
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 42 15/10/22 2:20PM
CHAPTER 3 | ELECTRICAL ACTIVITY OF THE HEART
Parasympathetic
(mV
0
Potential
−20
ACh
−40
Electrical
−60
−80
Figure II 3 4. Parasympathetic Effects on SA Nodal Cells
Figure II 3 4. Parasympathetic Effects on SANodal Cells
• Ach released from post ganglionic fibers
• M2 receptor; Gi Go; Opens K+ channels and inhibits cAMP
• Hyperpolarizes; reduced slope of pacemaker potential
• Functional effect
– Negative chronotropy (SA node): Decreased HR
– Negative dromotropy (AV node): Decreased conduction velocity
through the AV node
ELECTROCARDIOLOGY P wave: atrial depolarization
QRS complex: ventricular depolarization
Electrocardiogram
(40–100 msec)
The normal pattern of an electrocardiogram (EKG or ECG) is demonstrated below.
R wave: first upward deflection after the
P wave
R
S wave: first downward deflection after
an Rwave
Twave: ventricular repolarization
PR interval: start of the P wave to start
of the QRS complex (120–200 msec);
mostly due to conduction delay in the AV
T node
P
QT interval: start of the QRS complex to
the end of the Twave; represents
duration of the action potential
Q
T
ST segment: ventricles are depolarized
PR ST
S
during this segment; roughly corresponds
QRS to the plateau phase of the action
potential
QT
J point: end of the S wave; represents
Figure FigIuIre3 5II. 3N5o.rmNaolrmal PaPttaetrtenrn ofofananECGECG isoelectric point
43
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 43 15/10/22 2:20PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART II | EXCITABLE TISSUE
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
The height of waves is directly related to (a) mass of tissue, (b) rate of change in
potential, and (c) orientation of the lead to the direction of current flow.
The alignment of the cardiac action potential and the ECG recording are further
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences illustrated below.
• Phase 0 produces the QRS complex.
• Phase 3 produces the T wave.
Microbiology • The ST segment occurs during phase 2.
• The QT interval represents the duration of the action potential and this
interval is inversely related to heart rate. For example, stimulation of
sympathetics to the heart increases heart rate and reduces the duration of
the action potential, thus decreasing the QT interval.
R
P T
ECG
Q S
QT Interval
Figure II3 6. Ventricular Action Potential vs. ECG
Figure II 3 6. Ventricular Action Potential Versus ECG
Standard Conventions
The figure below shows a normal ECG trace from a single lead. The ECG
measures volts (y axis) per unit time (x axis) and the scales are standardized. Note
the heavier (darker) lines both horizontally and vertically. These represent “big”
boxes, each of which is further subdivided into 5 “small” boxes.
• y axis (volts): one big box = 0.5 mV
– Because there are 7 big boxes above the bottom line, the total height is
3.5 mV.
• x axis (time): one big box = 0.2 sec (200 msec)
– Because there are 5 subdivisions within each big box, each small box is
0.04 sec (40 msec). Here, 5 big boxes equal 1 second.
44
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 44 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 3 | ELECTRICAL ACTIVITY OF THE HEART
Begin 1 sec 2 sec 3 sec
300 150 100 75 60 5
Lead I
Four intervals = 75 beats/min
or
Four beats in 3 sec = 4!20 = 80 beats/min
FiguFriegure IIII33 77..EsEtsimtimataiotinon of HoefartHeaRratte Rate
Reading an ECG
The ECG is a powerful clinical tool, and it takes years of training to become fully
competent in detecting the many abnormalities it can detect. While a detailed
explanation is beyond the scope of this book, there are some arrhythmias and
alterations one should be able to recognize early in medical training.
Use the following step wise approach to help you detect alterations in the ECG.
Step 1: Rate and rhythm
If provided, use the rhythm strip (lead II) that typically runs the length of the
recording and is located on the bottom of the printout. We will use a single trace as
illustrated.
• Rhythm: Qualitatively look at the trace and determine if there is a steady
rhythm. This means the R waves occur regularly, i.e., the space between
each is approximately the same. If so then there is a steady rhythm; if not
then an unsteady rhythm.
• Rate: It is typically not necessary to determine the exact heart rate
(HR); simply determine if it is within the normal range (60–100/min). The
simplest way to do this is to find an R wave that is on a heavy (darker)
vertical line, and note where the next R wave occurs with respect to the
following count of subsequent heavy vertical lines:
1 = 300 beats/min
2 = 150
3 = 100
4 = 75
5 = 60
6 = 50
45
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 45 15/10/22 2:20PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART II | EXCITABLE TISSUE
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
For example, if the subsequent R wave occurs at the second heavy line
from the first R wave, then HR is 150 beats/min. If it occurs at the third
heavy line from the first R wave, then HR is 100 beats/min, and so on. In
the figure above, it occurs at the fourth heavy line, thus HR is 75 beats/min
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences for this ECG.
If the subsequent R wave occurs between heavy lines, then the HR is
between the values denoted for those lines. Even though it won’t be a
precise number, one can ascertain whether it is above or below the normal
Microbiology range.
Step 2: Waves
Qualitatively examine the trace for the presence of P, QRS, and T. Can they be seen
and do they look somewhat “normal”?
Step 3: PR interval
Find the PR interval and determine if it is in the normal range (120–200 msec).
This normal range translates into 3 5 small boxes. Look at several cycles to see if
the PR interval is consistent.
Step 4: Estimate the mean electrical axis
The mean electrical axis (MEA) indicates the net direction (vector) of current flow
during ventricular depolarization. Each lead can be represented by an angle.
Although the MEA axis can be determined very precisely, it is not important to do
so at this stage. Instead, we will define what quadrant (quadrant method) the MEA
falls in using a very simplified approach.
–90°
ri g ht
axis
deviation Leftaxis
de vi
ati
o n –30°
e
m
e
rt
E
+180° +I 0°
Ri
g
ht
a xi
s a
xi s
d
e
viation Nor
mal
+110°
+aVF
+90°
Figure II 3 8. Axis Ranges
Figure II 3 8. Axis Ranges
46
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 46 15/10/22 2:20PM
CHAPTER 3 | ELECTRICAL ACTIVITY OF THE HEART
Quadrant method
lead –aVF lead –aVF
extreme
left axis
right axis deviation Voltages:
lead –I deviation lead +I lead –I lead +I lead +I
lead +aVF
right axis normal normal axis
deviation
lead +aVF lead +aVF
lead –aVF lead –aVF
lead –I lead +I lead –I lead +I
lead +aVF lead +aVF
Voltages: Voltages:
lead +I lead –I
lead –aVF lead +aVF
left axis deviation right axis deviation
Figure FigurIeI 3II9.3Q9u.adQraunatdrant MMetheothdod
• Determine the net QRS deflection (upward minus downward) in lead I
and aVF. Using these 2 leads allows us to partition the mathematical grid
into 4 basic quadrants (upper left panel of Figure II 3 9).
• If the net deflections for leads I and aVF are positive, then the MEA is
between 0° and 90°, and is thus normal (upper right panel). Note: The
normal range for MEA is –30° and +110°. Even though the quadrant
method is not precise, it is close enough at this juncture.
• If the net deflection is positive in lead I and negative in aVF, then the
MEA is between 0° and –90°, and there is a left axis deviation (lower left
panel of figure above).
– Causes of left axis deviation are:
o Left heart enlargement, either left ventricular hypertrophy or
dilation
o Conduction defects in the left ventricle, except in the posterior
bundle branch
o Acute MI on right side tends to shift the axis left unless the right
ventricle dilates
47
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 47 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART II | EXCITABLE TISSUE
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
• If the net deflection is negative in lead I and positive in aVF, then the
MEA is between 90° and 180° and there is a right axis deviation (lower
right panel of figure above.
– Causes of right axis deviation are:
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
o Right heart enlargement, hypertrophy, or dilation
o Conduction defects of right ventricle or the posterior left bundle
branch
Microbiology
o Acute MI on left side tends to shift the axis right unless the left
ventricle dilates
Recall Question
Which of the following corresponds to phase 2 of the non nodal
action potential?
A. Upstroke of the action potential creating the QRS complex of
the EKG
B. Sodium channels transition to the inactivated state
C. Resting membrane potential
D. Repolarization phase creating the Twave of the EKG
E. Inward Ca2+ current offset by the outward K+ current resulting
in little change in membrane potential
Answer: E
ARRHYTHMIAS/ECG ALTERATIONS
A detailed description of the various arrhythmias is beyond the scope of this book,
but there are several that should be recognizable to you for the exam.
Heart Block
First Degree
Long PR interval (>200 msec; one big box). Slowed conduction through the AV
node. Rate and rhythm are typically normal.
Figure FiguIrIe 3 II103. 10F.irsFtirst DDeeggrereee HeaHrteartBlockBlock
48
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 48 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 3 | ELECTRICAL ACTIVITY OF THE HEART
Second Degree
Every QRS complex is preceded by a P wave, but not every P wave is followed by a
QRS complex. Some impulses are not transmitted through the AV node. There are
2 types:
• Mobitz type I (Wenckebach): Progressive prolongation of PR interval
until a ventricular beat is missed and then the cycle begins again. This
arrhythmia will have an unsteady rhythm.
• Mobitz type II: PR interval is consistent, i.e., it doesn’t lengthen and this
separates it from Wenckebach. The rhythm can be steady or unsteady
depending upon block ratio (P to QRS ratio: 2:1, 3:1, 3:2, etc.).
Figure FiguIIre3 I1I1.3 S1e1c.ondSecondDegDreeegree HHeeaarrtt BBlolockck (Mo(bMitozbitzTypeTyIp)e I)
P P P P P No QRS P
Figure II312. Second Degree Heart Block (Mobitz Type II)
Figure II 3 12. Second Degree Heart Block (Mobitz Type II)
Third Degree (Complete)
There is complete dissociation of P waves and QRS complexes. Impulses are not
transmitted through the AV node. Steady rhythm (usually) and very slow ventric
ular HR (usually); no consistent PR interval because impulses are not transmitted
through the AV node; rate for P waves is different than rate for R waves.
Figure FigurIeI 3II133.13.CoCmopmleptelete HeaHrteartBlockBlock
49
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 49 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART II | EXCITABLE TISSUE
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Atrial Flutter
Very fast atrial rate (>280 beats/min)
• Although fast, atrial conduction is still intact and coordinated.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
• Characteristics: “saw tooth” appearance of waves between QRS complexes;
no discernible T waves; rhythm typically steady
Microbiology
FigureFigure IIII331144.. AAttrriiaall FluFttleurtter
Atrial Fibrillation
Uncoordinated atrial conduction
• Lack of a coordinated conduction results in no atrial contraction
• Characteristics: unsteady rhythm (usually) and no discernible P waves
Figure FigureII I3I 3151.5. AAtritarilal FiFbirbilrlialtliaotinon
Wolff Parkinson White Syndrome
Accessory pathway (Bundle of Kent) between atria and ventricles
• Characteristics: short PR interval; steady rhythm and normal rate (usu
ally); slurred upstroke of the R wave (delta wave); widened QRS complex
• The cardiac impulse can travel in retrograde fashion to the atria over the
accessory pathway and initiate a reentrant tachycardia.
50
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 50 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 3 | ELECTRICAL ACTIVITY OF THE HEART
Figure FIiIgure3 16II. 3 W16o.lffWolffParkPianrskoinnson WhWitehiteSyndromSyendrome
Other Factors Changing the ECG
ST segment changes
• Elevated: transmural infarct or Prinzmetal angina (coronary
vasospasm)
• Depressed: subendocardial ischemia or exertional (stable) angina
Potassium
• Hyperkalemia: increases rate of repolarization, resulting in
sharp spiked T waves and a shortened QT interval
• Hypokalemia: decreases rate of repolarization, resulting in U waves and a
prolonged QT interval
Calcium
• Hypercalcemia: decreases the QT interval
• Hypocalcemia: increases the QT interval
51
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 51 15/10/22 2:20P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 52 15/10/22 2:20P
PART III
MUSCLE
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 53 15/10/22 2:20P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 54 15/10/22 2:20P
1#
Excitation Contraction Coupling
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Interpret scenarios on skeletal muscle structure function relationships
❏ Interpret scenarios on regulation of cytosolic calcium
❏ Interpret scenarios on altering force in skeletal muscle
❏ Interpret scenarios on comparison of striated muscles (skeletal vs.
cardiac)
❏ Interpret scenarios on smooth muscle function
SKELETAL MUSCLE STRUCTURE–FUNCTION
RELATIONSHIPS
Ultrastructure of a Myofibril
Skeletal muscle is made up of individual cells called muscle fibers. Longitudinally
within the muscle fibers, there are bundles of myofibrils.
• A myofibril can be subdivided into individual sarcomeres. A sarcomere is
demarked by Z lines.
• Sarcomeres are composed of filaments creating bands.
• Contraction causes no change in the length of the A band, a shortening of
the I band, and a shortening in the H zone (band).
• Titin anchors myosin and is an important component of striated muscle’s
elasticity.
55
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 55 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART III | MUSCLE
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Z M Z
line line line
Magnified muscle myofibril
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Myofibril
Microbiology
Sarcomere
Sarcomere
Actin Myosin
H zone
filament filament
I band A band Z line Titin
Figure III 1 1. Organization of Sarcomeres
Figure III 1 1. Organization of Sarcomeres
Ultrastructure of the Sarcoplasmic Reticulum
The external and internal membrane system of a skeletal muscle cell is displayed
below.
T tubule
Terminal cisternae
Sarcolemma
Myofibrils
Figure III F1igur2e. SkIIeIleta1l2. SkeleMtaulscleMuscleCellCellMMemembrbarnaenses
T tubule membranes are extensions of the surface membrane; therefore, the
interiors of the T tubules are part of the extracellular compartment.
Terminal cisternae: The sarcoplasmic reticulum is part of the internal membrane
system, one function of which is to store calcium. In skeletal muscle, most of the
calcium is stored in the terminal cisternae close to the T tubule system.
56
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 56 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 1 | EXCITATION CONTRACTION COUPLING
Functional Proteins of the Sarcomere
The figure below shows the relationships among the proteins that make up the thin
and thick filaments in striated muscle (skeletal and cardiac) and the changes that
occur with contraction.
Changes Following
Resting Muscle
Attachment of Calcium to Troponin
Thin
filament
Troponin Ca2+
Myosin binding
Actin Tropomyosin
Ca2+ site
binding
site B
Myosin
(cross bridge)
A
Figure III 1 3. Regulation of Actin by Troponin
Figure III 1 3. Regulation of Actin by Troponin
Proteins of the thin filaments
• Actin is the structural protein of the thin filament. It possesses attach
ment sites for myosin.
• Tropomyosin blocks myosin binding sites on actin.
• Troponin is composed of 3 subunits: troponin T (binds to tropomyosin),
troponin I (binds to actin and inhibits contraction), and troponin C
(binds calcium).
– Under resting conditions, no calcium is bound to the troponin, pre
venting actin and myosin from interacting.
– When calcium binds to troponin C, the troponin tropomyosin complex
moves, exposing actin’s binding site for myosin. (part B
of the figure above)
Proteins of the thick filaments
Myosin has ATPase activity. The splitting of ATP puts myosin in a “high energy”
state; it also increases myosin’s affinity for actin.
• Once myosin binds to actin, the chemical energy is transferred to mechan
ical energy, causing myosin to pull the actin filament. This generates
active tension in the muscle and is commonly referred to as “the power
stroke.”
• If the force generated by the power stroke is sufficient to move the load
(see next chapter), then the muscle shortens (isotonic contraction).
• If the force generated is not sufficient to move the load (see next chapter),
then the muscle doesn’t shorten (isometric contraction).
57
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 57 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART III | MUSCLE
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Cross Bridge Interactions (Chemical Mechanical Transduction)
Cross bridge cycling starts when free calcium is available and attaches to troponin,
which in turn moves tropomyosin so that myosin binds to actin. Contraction (of a
muscle) is the continuous cycling of cross bridges.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Cross bridge
Microbiology
Hydrolysis of ATP
puts myosin in high
energy and high Z line
actin affinity state.
Resting muscle
• Tropomyosin: covers actin's
binding site for myosin
Cytosolic Ca2+ rises and binds to
troponin C, exposing myosin binding
site on actin.
Dissociation
• ATP dissociates
actin myosin
• Myosin enters
low energy,
low affinity state
Binding of myosin to actin
• Actin myosin bind
energy converted Chemical
to mechanical aspects of contraction
• Myosin "pulls" actin
• Actin filament slides, producing active tension.
Figure III 1 4. Crossbridge Cycling During Contraction
Figure III 1 4. Cross bridge Cycling During Contraction
ATP is not required to form the cross bridge linking to actin but is required to
break the link with actin. Cross bridge cycling (contraction) continues until either
of the following occurs:
• Withdrawal of Ca2+: cycling stops at position 1 (normal resting muscle)
• ATP is depleted: cycling stops at position 3 (rigor mortis; this would not
occur under physiologic conditions)
58
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 58 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 1 | EXCITATION CONTRACTION COUPLING
REGULATION OF CYTOSOLIC CALCIUM
The sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) has a high concentration of Ca2+. Thus, there is a
strong electrochemical gradient for Ca2+ to diffuse from the SR into the cytosol.
There are 2 key receptors involved in the flux of Ca2+ from the SR into the cytosol:
dihydropyridine (DHP) and ryanodine (RyR).
• DHP is a voltage gated Ca2+ channel located in the sarcolemmal mem
brane. Although it is a voltage gated Ca2+ channel, Ca2+ does not flux
through this receptor in skeletal muscle. Rather, DHP functions as a
voltage sensor. When skeletal muscle is at rest, DHP blocks RyR.
• RyR is a calcium channel on the SR membrane. When the muscle is in the
resting state, RyR is blocked by DHP. Thus, Ca2+ is prevented from
diffusing into the cytosol.
Action
T tubule T tubule
potential
Sarcolemma Sarcolemma
Cytosol Cytosol
Terminal cisternae Terminal cisternae
of SR Ca2+ Ca2+ of SR
Ca2+
Ca2+ Ca2+
DHP
DHP
Ca2+ ATP SERCA Ca2+ ATP SERCA
Ca2+ Ca2+
Ca2+ Ca2+
RyR RyR
Ca2+ Ca2+ Ca2+
(closed) (open)
Ca2+ Ca2+
Ca2+ Ca2+
Ca2+ Ca2+
Ca2+ Ca2+ Ca2+
Ca2+ Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
A. Resting skeletal muscle B. Action potential in sarcolemma
Figure III 1 5. Regulation of Ca2+ Release by Sarcoplasmic Reticulum
Figure III 1 5. Regulation of Ca2+ Release by Sarcoplasmic Reticulum
59
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 59 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART III | MUSCLE
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Sequence
1. Skeletal muscle action potential is initiated at the neuromuscular junction (see
section II).
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences 2. The action potential travels down the T tubule.
3. The voltage change causes a conformation shift in DHP (voltage sensor), remov
ing its block of RyR (part B of the figure above).
4. Removal of the DHP block allows Ca2+ to diffuse into the cytosol (follows its
Microbiology
concentration gradient).
5. The rise in cytosolic Ca2+ opens more RyR channels (calcium induced calcium
release).
6. Ca2+ binds to troponin C, which in turn initiates cross bridge cycle, creating
active tension.
7. Ca2+ is pumped back into the SR by a calcium ATPase on the SR membrane
called sarcoplasmic endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPase (SERCA).
8. The fall in cytosolic Ca2+ causes tropomyosin to once again cover actin’s bind
ing site for myosin and the muscle relaxes, provided of course ATP is available
to dissociate actin and myosin.
Key Points
• Contraction relaxation states are determined by cytosolic levels of Ca2+.
• The source of the calcium that binds to the troponin C in skeletal muscle
is solely from the cell’s sarcoplasmic reticulum. Thus, no extracellular
Ca2+ is involved.
• Two ATPases are involved in contraction:
– Myosin ATPase supplies the energy for the mechanical aspects of
contraction by putting myosin in a high energy and affinity state.
– SERCA pumps Ca2+ back into the SR to terminate the contraction, i.e.,
causes relaxation.
ALTERING FORCE IN SKELETAL MUSCLE
Mechanical Response to a Single Action Potential
The figure below illustrates the mechanical contraction of skeletal muscle and the
action potential on the same time scale. Note the sequence of events: action
potential causes Ca2+ release. The release of Ca2+ evokes a muscle contraction
(twitch).
60
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 60 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 1 | EXCITATION CONTRACTION COUPLING
Active Force
Intracellular
Free Calcium
Membrane
Potential
Time (msec)
Figure FiIgIuIre1 6II.I 1Th6e. TimTeimeCourseCoursoef EventsofDuErvinengts ContraDctuiorinng Contraction
The muscle membrane has completely repolarized well before the start of force
development.
Summation and Recruitment
Under normal circumstances, enough Ca2+ is released by a single muscle action
potential to completely saturate all the troponin C binding sites. This means
that all available cross bridges are activated and thus force cannot be enhanced by
increasing cytosolic Ca2+.
Instead, peak force in skeletal muscle is increased in 2 ways: summation and
recruitment.
Summation
• Because the membrane has repolarized well before force development,
multiple action potentials can be generated prior to force development.
• Each action potential causes a pulse of Ca2+ release.
• Each pulse of Ca2+ initiates cross bridge cycling, and because the muscle
has not relaxed, the mechanical force adds onto (summates) the force from
the previous action potential (Figure III 1 7).
• This summation can continue until the muscle tetanizes, in which case
there is sufficient free Ca2+ so that cross bridge cycling is continuous.
Recruitment
• A single alpha motor neuron innervates multiple muscle fibers. The alpha
motor neuron and all the fibers it innervates is called a motor unit.
• Recruitment means activating more motor units, which in turn engage
more muscle fibers, causing greater force production.
61
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 61 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART III | MUSCLE
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
(mV
Membrane+30
Potential 0
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
−70
Tetanus
Summation of
Microbiology Force
twitches
Active
Time (msec)
Figure FiguIIrIe 1III7.1S7u.mmSuamtiomnation ofofIndIinvdidivuiadlual TwitchesTwitches
andandFusFiounsion inintotoTetaTneutsanus
Recall Question
Which of the following is the mechanism of action of rigor mortis?
A. Withdrawal of Ca2+, which stops cycling at position 1
B. Cytosolic calcium rises and binds to troponin C, exposing
myosin binding site on actin
C. Depletion of ATP, which stops cycling at position 3
D. Depletion of calcium, which stops cycling at position 3
E. Depletion of actin myosin cross bridging, which stops cycling
at position 3
Answer: C
62
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 62 15/10/22 2:20PM
CHAPTER 1 | EXCITATION CONTRACTION COUPLING
COMPARISON OF STRIATED MUSCLES
Skeletal and cardiac muscle are both striated muscle and share many similarities.
Nevertheless, there are important differences.
Similarities
• Both have the same functional proteins, i.e., actin, tropomyosin, troponin,
myosin, and titin.
• A rise in cytosolic Ca2+ initiates cross bridge cycling thereby producing
active tension.
• ATP plays the same role.
• Both have SERCA.
• Both have RyR receptors on the SR and thus show calcium induced
calcium release.
Differences BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY
• Extracellular Ca2+ is involved in cardiac contractions, but not skeletal Dysfunction in the titin protein has been
muscle. This extracellular Ca2+ causes calcium induced calcium release in associated with dilated and restrictive
cardiac cells.
cardiomyopathies (see next section).
• Magnitude of SR Ca2+ release can be altered in cardiac (see section on car
diac mechanics), but not skeletal muscle.
• Cardiac cells are electrically coupled by gap junctions, which do not exist
in skeletal muscle.
• Cardiac myocytes remove cytosolic Ca2+ by 2 mechanisms: SERCA and a
Na+—Ca2+ exchanger (3 Na+ in, 1 Ca2+ out) on the sarcolemmal mem
brane. Skeletal muscle only utilizes SERCA.
Figure IFIiIgure1 8.IIIR1em8o.vaRlemoval ofofCCyytotossoolilcic CalciCuamlciumin MyocairndialMyocaCrdeilalsl Cells
63
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 63 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART III | MUSCLE
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
• Cardiac cells have a prolonged action potential. The figure below illustrates
that the twitch tension is already falling (muscle starting to relax), while the
action potential is still in the absolute refractory period. Thus, a second action
potential cannot be evoked before the mechanical event is almost completed.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences This approximately equal mechanical and electrical event prevents summa
tion of the force and if the muscle can’t summate, it can’t tetanize.
Microbiology
Muscle twitch
Action
potential
Relative refractory
period
Absolute
refractory
period
0 100 200 300
Time (msec)
Figure III 1 9. Force and Refractory Periods
Figure III 1 9. Force and Refractory Periods
SMOOTH MUSCLE
Actin Myosin Interaction
No actin myosin binding = Relaxation Actin myosin binding = Contraction
Actin Actin
Myosin binding site Myosin binding site
P
Phosphorylation
Myosin light
by MLCK
chain
Dephosphorylated
by MLC
phosphatase
Myosin head Myosin head
Myosin heavy Myosin heavy
chain chain
MLC = Myosin light chain
MLCK = Myosin light chain kinase
Figure III 1 10a. Relaxed Smooth Muscle Figure III 1 10b. Contracted Smooth Muscle
64
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 64 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 1 | EXCITATION CONTRACTION COUPLING
• In contrast to striated muscle, smooth muscle lacks tropomyosin, tropo
nin, and titin.
• Similar to striated muscle, the binding of actin and myosin produces
tension.
• In the resting state, MLC is not phosphorylated and has very low affinity
for actin. Thus, they do not interact, and smooth muscle is relaxed
(Figure III 1 10a).
• On the other hand, phosphorylation of MLC puts myosin in a high affin
ity state for actin, resulting in the binding of actin and myosin to produce
a power stroke (Figure III 1 10b).
• MLC is phosphorylated by myosin light chain kinase (MLCK) and
dephosphorylated by MLC phosphatase.
• Similar to striated muscle, the trigger for contraction is increasing cyto
solic calcium, which activates MLCK.
Regulation of Smooth Muscle
• Voltage gated calcium channels (L type) reside in the sarcolemma of
smooth muscle. Depolarization opens these channels, resulting in calcium
influx into the cytosol. This calcium triggers calcium release from the SR
(calcium induced calcium release, similar to cardiac muscle).
• Increasing IP3 also evokes calcium efflux from the SR. IP3 is increased by
an agonist binding a Gq coupled receptor (e.g., the alpha 1 receptor).
• This cytosolic calcium binds to the protein calmodulin (CAM). This
calcium calmodulin complex activates MLCK, which in turn phosphory
lates MLC.
• As indicated, phosphorylation of MLC causes binding of actin and
myosin, in turn eliciting a contraction of smooth muscle.
• Although not illustrated in Figure III 1 11, similar to striated muscle (see
above), ATP dissociates actin and myosin. If MLC remains phosphory
lated, then actin and myosin rebind to produce tension (similar to cross
bridge cycling for striated muscle).
• MLC phosphatase dephosphorylates myosin, reducing the affinity of
myosin for actin, causing relaxation.
• When cytosolic calcium is high, MLCK dominates. When cytosolic
calcium is low, MLC phosphatase dominates.
• Smooth muscle reduces cytosolic calcium via the same mechanisms
described above for cardiac cells.
65
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 65 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART III | MUSCLE
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Microbiology
Figure III 1 11. Smooth Muscle Cell
66
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 66 15/10/22 2:20P
2#
Skeletal Muscle Mechanics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Use knowledge of overview of muscle mechanics
❏ Interpret scenarios on length tension curves
❏ Use knowledge of relationship between velocity and load
❏ Demonstrate understanding of properties of white vs. red muscle
❏ Solve problems concerning comparison of muscle types
MUSCLE MECHANICS
Preload
Preload is the load on a muscle in a relaxed state, i.e., before it contracts. Applying
preload to muscle does 2 things:
• Stretches the muscle: This in turn, stretches the sarcomere. The greater
the preload, the greater the stretch of the sarcomere.
• Generates passive tension in the muscle: Muscle is elastic (see titin,
previous chapter) and thus “resists” the stretch applied to it. Think of the
“snap back” that occurs when one stretches a rubber band. The force of
this resistance is measured as passive tension. The greater the preload,
the greater the passive tension in the muscle.
Afterload
Afterload is the load the muscle works against. If one wants to lift a 10 kg weight,
then this weight represents the afterload. Using the 10 kg weight example, 2
possibilities exist:
• If the muscle generates more than 10 kg of force, then the weight moves as
the muscle shortens. This is an isotonic contraction.
• If the muscle is unable to generate more than 10 kg of force, then the
muscle won’t shorten. This is an isometric contraction.
• Types of tension
– Passive: produced by the preload
– Active: produced by cross bridge cycling
– Total: sum of active and passive tension
67
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 67 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART III | MUSCLE
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
LENGTH–TENSION CURVES
Length–tension curves are important for understanding both skeletal and cardiac
muscle function. The graphs that follow are all generated from skeletal muscle in
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences vitro, but the information can be applied to both skeletal muscle and heart muscle
in vivo.
Passive Tension Curve
Microbiology
As seen in the figure below, the green line shows that muscle behaves like a rubber
band. The elastic properties of the muscle resist this stretch, and the resulting
tension is recorded. There is a direct (non linear) relationship between the degree
of stretch and the passive tension created that resists this stretch.
Point A: no preload, thus no
stretch and no passive tension
Point B: preload of 1 g stretches muscle, In vitro skeletal
thus increasing its resting length, muscle
resulting in ~1 g of passive tension 5 C
(grams
Point C: preload of 5 g increases muscle 4 Passive
tension
stretch, producing a greater resting
length and thus a greater passive tension Tension 3 Active curve
2 tension
curve B
1
A
0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Muscle Length (units)
A B C
Infinite
afterload
1g
5g
In vitro skeletal muscle
Passive tension = 0 Passive tension = 1 Passive tension = 5
Active tension = 2 Active tension = 4 Active tension = 3
Total tension = 2 Total tension = 5 Total tension = 8
Figure III 2 1. Preload, Active and Passive Tension:
Figure III 2 1. Preload, Active and Passive Tension:
The Length–Tension Relationship
The Length–Tension Relationship
68
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 68 15/10/22 2:20PM
CHAPTER 2 | SKELETAL MUSCLE MECHANICS
Active Tension
In the figure above, the purple line shows the tension developed by stimulating the
muscle to contract at the different preloads. In this example, the contraction is a
maximal isometric contraction, i.e., the contraction produces tension, but the
afterload is much greater than the tension the muscle develops and thus the muscle
doesn’t shorten. Recall that active tension represents the force generated by
cross bridge cycling. It is important to note the shape (bell shaped) of the active
tension curve.
• Preload of A: When there is no preload, the evoked muscle contraction
develops ~2 g of active tension.
• Preload of B: At this preload, the active tension produced by stimulation
of the muscle is greater, ~4 g.
• Preload of C: This preload results in less active tension than the previous
preload. Thus, active tension increases as the muscle is stretched, up to a
point. If stretched beyond this point, then active tension begins to fall.
• Optimal length (Lo): Lo represents the muscle length (preload) that
produces the greatest active tension. (In the figure above, this occurs at the
preload designated by B.)
Explanation of Bell shaped Active Tension Curve
The same figure above shows a simplified picture of a sarcomere. Actin is the thin
brown line, while myosin is depicted in purple. The magnitude of active tension
depends on the number of actin myosin cross bridges that can form (directly
related).
• Preload A: actin filaments overlap
– Thus, the force that can be exerted by myosin tugging the actin is
compromised and the active tension is less.
• Preload B (Lo): all myosin heads can bind to actin, and there is separation
of actin filaments
– Thus, active tension generated is greatest here because there is optimal
overlap of actin and myosin.
• Preload C: the stretch is so great that actin has been pulled away from
some of the myosin filament, and thus fewer actin myosin interactions are
available, resulting in diminished active tension.
– If taken to the extreme, greater stretch could pull actin such that no
actin myosin interactions can occur, and thus no active tension results
(active tension curve intersects the x axis). This is an experimental,
rather than physiologic phenomenon.
• Total tension: sum of passive and active tension (bottom of figure above)
69
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 69 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART III | MUSCLE
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN VELOCITY AND LOAD
As seen in the figure below, the maximum velocity of shortening (Vmax) occurs
when there is no afterload on the muscle. Increasing afterload decreases velocity,
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences and when afterload exceeds the maximum force generated by the muscle, shorten
ing does not occur (isometric contraction).
*Maximum velocity (Vmax) is
Microbiology
determined by the muscle’s
ATPase activity. It is the ATPase
activity that determines a fast
versus a slow muscle.
**Maximum force generated by a
*
muscle occurs when summation is
maximal (complete summation) and
all motor units for the given muscle are Velocit B
fully recruited. The absolute amount of
force is directly related to muscle mass
and preload, with the greatest force
occurring when the preload is at Lo. A
**
Afterload
Figure III 2 2. FFoigrcuer–eVelocityIII 2Cur2v.e Force–Velocity Curve
In the figure above, muscle A is a smaller, slower muscle (red muscle), while
muscle B is a larger, faster muscle (white muscle).
As load increases, the distance shortened during a single contraction decreases.
So, with increased afterload, both the velocity of contraction and the distance
decrease.
PROPERTIES OF WHITE VS. RED MUSCLE
White Muscle
Generally, white muscle is the large (powerful) muscle that is utilized short term,
e.g., ocular muscles, leg muscles of a sprinter. Major characteristics are as follows:
• Large mass per motor unit
• High ATPase activity (fast muscle)
• High capacity for anaerobic glycolysis
• Low myoglobin
70
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 70 15/10/22 2:20PM
CHAPTER 2 | SKELETAL MUSCLE MECHANICS
Red Muscle
Generally, red muscle is the smaller (less powerful) muscle utilized long term
(endurance muscle), e.g., postural muscle. Major characteristics are as follows:
• Small mass per motor unit
• Lower ATPase activity (slower muscle)
• High capacity for aerobic metabolism (mitochondria)
• High myoglobin (imparts red color)
Recall Question
Which of the following is a characteristic of white muscle?
A. It is responsible for slower muscle movements.
B. It has a high mitochondria content.
C. It primarily utilizes aerobic metabolism.
D. It has a greater mass per motor unit.
E. It contains high amounts of myoglobin.
Answer: D
71
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 71 15/10/22 2:20P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 72 15/10/22 2:20P
PART IV
CARDIOVASCULAR
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 73 15/10/22 2:20P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 74 15/10/22 2:20P
Hemodynamics and
1#
Important Principles
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Answer questions about systolic performance of the ventricle
❏ Explain information related to ventricular function curves
❏ Solve problems concerning chronic changes: systolic and diastolic
dysfunction
THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
Cardiac Output
The cardiovascular system consists of 2 pumps (left and right ventricles) and 2
circuits (pulmonary and systemic) connected in series.
Pulmonary
Circuit
Right Left
Heart Heart
(venous (cardiac
return ↑) output ↓)
Systemic
Circuit
Figure V F1igu1re. OIvVerv1iew1. The CoirfculaCtoirrcyulatorySystem System
NOTE
When circuits are connected in series, flow must be equal in the 2 circuits.
The function of the heart is to transport
• Cardiac output is the output of either the left or right ventricle, and blood and deliver oxygen in order to
because of the series system, they are equal. maintain adequate tissue perfusion. It also
• The chemical composition of pulmonary venous blood (high oxygen, low removes waste products, e.g., CO2 created
carbon dioxide) is very close to the chemical composition of systemic by tissue metabolism.
arterial blood.
• Systemic mixed venous blood entering the right atrium has the same
composition (low oxygen, high carbon dioxide) as pulmonary arterial
blood.
75
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 75 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Structure–Function Relationships of the Systemic Circuit
The systemic circuit is a branching circuit. It begins as a large single vessel, the
aorta, and branches extensively into progressively smaller vessels until the capillar
ies are reached. The reverse then takes place in the venous circuit.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Microbiology
Venae
Aorta Arteries Veins cavae
Arterioles Venules
Capillaries
Figure FiVgure1 2.IVO1rg2an.izOatrigoannization ooff StyhsetemicSysteVmeiscsels Vessels
HEMODYNAMICS
Pressure, Flow, Resistance
The Poiseuille equation represents the relationship of flow, pressure, and resis
tance.
_P1− P2
Q =
R
It can be applied to a single vessel, an organ, or an entire circuit.
Q: flow (mL/min)
P1: upstream pressure (pressure head)
Pressure gradient
for segment or circuit (mm Hg)
P1 P2
P2: pressure at the end of the segment
or circuit (mm Hg) Blood flow
R: resistance of vessels between P1 and
Resistance
P2 (mm Hg/mL/min)
Figure IV 1 3. Poiseuille Equation Applied to Single Vessel
Figure V 1 3. Poiseuille Equation Applied to Single Vessel
76
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 76 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 1 | HEMODYNAMICS AND IMPORTANT PRINCIPLES
The flow to an organ such as the kidney, for example, could be calculated as mean
arterial pressure minus renal venous pressure divided by the resistance of all
vessels in the renal circuit.
Determinants of resistance
_P_1___−_ P2
Resistance =
Q
Units of Resistance = _ m m__ L m_ /m __ in Hg = ____p_re_s_s_u_r_e
volume/time
The resistance of a vessel is determined by 3 major variables: R μ _v_L
r4
Vessel radius (r) is the most important factor determining resistance. If resistance
changes, then the following occurs:
• Increased resistance decreases blood flow, increases upstream pressure,
and decreases downstream pressure.
• Decreased resistance increases blood flow, decreases upstream pressure,
and increases downstream pressure.
• The pressure “drop” (difference between upstream and downstream) is
directly related to the resistance. There is a big pressure drop when
resistance is a high and minimal pressure drop when resistance is a low.
120
Hg
mm 80
Pressure
40
0 Aorta Arteries Arterioles Capillaries Venules Veins Cavae Hear
Venae Right
Figure IV1 4V. S1yste4m.icSystSemysitcem PressSuyrsetseFmigure Pressures
77
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 77 15/10/22 2:20PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Whole body application of resistance
The figure above shows, in a horizontal subject, the phasic and mean pressures
from the aorta to the vena cava.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences • Mean arterial pressure (MAP) is measured in the aorta and is
about 93 mm Hg (time weighted average because more time is spent
in diastole). This represents the pressure head (upstream pressure) for the
systemic circulation.
Microbiology • The pressure dissipates as the blood flows down the circulatory tree
because of resistance. The amount of pressure lost in a particular segment
is proportional to the resistance of that segment.
• There is a small pressure drop in the major arteries (low resistance
segment); the largest drop is across the arterioles (highest resistance
segment), and another small pressure drop occurs in the major veins
(low resistance segment).
• Since the largest pressure drop across the systemic circulation occurs in
arterioles, they are the main site of resistance. This resistance is called
total peripheral resistance (TPR) or systemic vascular resistance (SVR).
• TPR/SVR is afterload to the heart (see next chapter).
NOTE Blood viscosity (v) is a property of a fluid that is a measure of the fluid’s internal
Ifa blood sample from an adult is resistance to flow. The greater the viscosity, the greater the resistance.
centrifuged in a graduated test tube, the
The prime determinant of blood viscosity is the hematocrit.
relative volume of packed red cells is called
the hematocrit. For a normal adult this
volume is about 40–45% of the total, 8
meaning the red cells occupy about 40–45% 7
(poise
of the blood in the body. 6
The white blood cells are less dense than Viscosi 5 ty
4
the red blood cells and form a thin layer
Normal blood
(the so called buffy coat). That is why 3
2
hematocrit is a major determinant of blood
viscosity. 1
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Hematocrit (%)
Figure FiVgure1 5.IVE1ffe5c.tEffectofofHeHmeamtoactorictrit onoBnloodBlooVdiscosityViscosity
Anemia decreases viscosity. Polycythemia increases viscosity.
Vessel length (L)
The greater the length, the greater the resistance.
• If the length doubles, the resistance doubles.
• If the length decreases by half, the resistance decreases by half.
• Vessel length is constant; therefore, changes in length are not a physiologic
factor in regulation of resistance, pressure, or flow.
78
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 78 15/10/22 2:20PM
CHAPTER 1 | HEMODYNAMICS AND IMPORTANT PRINCIPLES
Velocity NOTE
Velocity is the rate at which blood travels through a blood vessel. Mean linear Although velocity is directly related to
velocity is equal to flow divided by the cross sectional area (CSA). Thus, velocity is blood flow, it is different in that it refers to a
directly related to flow, but if CSA changes then velocity is affected. The important rate, e.g., cm/sec.
functional applications of this are as follows:
• CSA is high in capillaries, but low in the aorta.
• Velocity is therefore high in the aorta and low in the capillaries.
• The functional consequence of this is that low velocity in the capillaries
optimizes exchange.
• The potential pathology of this is that because the aorta has high velocity
and a large diameter, turbulent blood flow can occur.
Laminar versus Turbulent Flow
There can be 2 types of flow in a system.
• Laminar flow (flow in layers) occurs throughout the normal cardiovascu
lar system, excluding flow in the heart. The layer with the highest velocity
is in the center of the tube.
• Turbulent flow (nonlayered flow) creates murmurs. These are heard as
bruits in vessels with severe stenosis. Turbulent flow produces more
resistance than laminar flow.
Figure V 1 6. Laminar Flow Figure V 1 7. Turbulent Flow
Figure IV 1 6. Laminar Flow Figure IV 1 7. Turbulent Flow
Relation of Reynold’s number to laminar and turbulent flow
>2,000 = turbulent flow
<2,000 = laminar flow
Reynold’s number =
(_d_i_a_m_e_t_er_)_______(_v_e_lo_c_i_ty) (density)
viscosity
The number inducing turbulence is not absolute. For example, atherosclerosis
reduces the Reynold’s number at which turbulence begins to develop in the
systemic arteries. In addition, thrombi are more likely to develop with turbulent
flow than in a laminar flow system.
The following promote the development of turbulent flow (i.e., increase Reynolds’
number):
• Increasing tube diameter
• Increasing velocity
• Decreasing blood viscosity, e.g., anemia (cardiac flow murmur)
79
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 79 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
The vessel in the systemic circuit that is closest to the development of turbulent
flow is the aorta. It is a large diameter vessel with high velocity. This is where
turbulence should appear first in anemia.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences The following also promote turbulence:
• Vessel branching
• Narrow orifice (severe stenosis)—due to very high velocity of flow
Microbiology During inspiration and expiration, turbulent flow occurs in the large airways of
the conducting zone.
Series Versus Parallel Circuits
• If resistors are in series, then the total resistance is the sum of each
individual resistor. RT = R1 + R2 + R3. ..
• If resistors are in parallel, then the total resistance is added as reciprocals
of each resistor. 1/RT = 1/R1 + 1/R2 + 1/R3. ..
• Thus, total resistance is less in parallel circuits compared to series circuits.
The application of this concept is that blood flow to the various organ beds of the
systemic circulation is the result of parallel branches off of the aorta. Because they
are parallel branches, the total resistance of the systemic circulation is less than if
the organs were in series bloodflow wise (note figure below).
Lungs
Cerebral
LA
RA
Coronary
RV LV
Liver
Stomach, Spleen
Pancreas
Endocrine
glands Intestines
Kidneys
Skin, Muscle, Bone
Figure V F1igu9re. SIyVstem1ic8. SystemiCcircuitCircuit
80
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 80 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 1 | HEMODYNAMICS AND IMPORTANT PRINCIPLES
VESSEL COMPLIANCE
C = Δ__V_
ΔP
Compliance of a vessel can be calculated, but the resulting number is, for all
practical purposes, meaningless. It is much more important to simply have a good
concept of compliance and understand the differences in compliance among the
vessels that make up the cardiovascular system.
• Compliance is essentially how easily a vessel is stretched. If a vessel is
easily stretched, it is considered very compliant. The opposite is noncom
pliant or stiff.
• Elasticity is the inverse of compliance. A vessel that has high elasticity (a
large tendency to rebound from a stretch) has low compliance.
Systemic Veins
Systemic veins are about 20 times more compliant than systemic arteries.
• Veins also contain about 70% of the systemic blood volume and thus
represent the major blood reservoir.
• If blood is in the veins, then it is not available for the heart to pump and is
thus not contributing to the circulating blood volume.
In short: When considering whole body hemodynamics, compliance resides in the
venous system. One must not forget the functional implications of arterial
compliance, particularly with respect to arterial pressures (see below), but for the
circulation as a whole, compliance is in the venous system.
WALL TENSION
LaPlace relationship: T: wall tension
T ∝ Pr P: pressure
The aorta is the artery with the greatest wall tension (greatest pressure and radius). r: radius
Development of an Arterial Aneurysm
A developing arterial aneurysm can be seen below. The pressures at points A, B,
and C will be approximately the same.
A B C
Figure FiguVre 1IV101. 9.AAorotritcic EnElanrlgaergmeemnetnt
81
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 81 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
• Thus, because the aneurysm has a greater radius, its wall tension is greater
than that of the surrounding normal vessel segments.
• Also, as the aneurysm enlarges, wall tension increases and the vessel is
more likely to burst. Examples are subarachnoid hemorrhage, aortic
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
aneurysm, and diverticulitis.
• Another type of aneurysm is a dissecting aneurysm. In systemic arterial
disease, the high velocity in the aorta may damage the endothelial lining,
allowing blood to flow between and dissect the layers of the aorta. This
Microbiology
weakens the aortic wall and is considered a life threatening condition.
• This principle also is important in dilated heart failure, in which the
increased chamber size places greater tension on the failing ventricle. This
further reduces its performance.
82
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 82 15/10/22 2:20P
2#
Cardiac Muscle Mechanics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Describe how preload, contractility, and afterload affect systolic
performance of the ventricle
❏ Predict movement of a point on a ventricular function curve due to
physiologic and disease changes
❏ Describe examples of chronic pressure and volume overload
SYSTOLIC PERFORMANCE OF THE VENTRICLE
Systolic performance means the overall force generated by the ventricular muscle
during systole. The heart does 2 things in systole: pressurizes and ejects blood.
An important factor influencing systolic performance is the number of cross
bridges cycling during contraction. The greater the number of cross bridges
cycling, the greater the force of contraction.
Systolic performance is determined by 3 independent variables:
• Preload
• Contractility
• Afterload
These 3 factors are summed together to determine the overall systolic performance
of the ventricle. Recent work has demonstrated that they are not completely
independent, but the generalizations made here will apply to the physiologic and
clinical setting.
Preload
As in skeletal muscle, preload is the load on the muscle in the relaxed state.
More specifically, it is the load or prestretch on ventricular muscle at the end of
diastole.
Preload on ventricular muscle is not measured directly; rather, indices are utilized.
The best indices of preload on ventricular muscle are those measured directly in
the ventricles. Indices of left ventricular preload:
• Left ventricular end diastolic volume (LVEDV)
• Left ventricular end diastolic pressure (LVEDP)
83
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 83 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Possibly somewhat less reliable indices of left ventricular preload are those
measured in the venous system.
• Central venous pressure (CVP)
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences • Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP)
• Right atrial pressure (RAP)
Pulmonary wedge pressure, sometimes called pulmonary capillary wedge pressure,
Microbiology is measured from the tip of a Swan Ganz catheter, which, after passing through the
right heart, has been wedged in a small pulmonary artery. The tip is pointing
downstream toward the pulmonary capillaries, and the pressure measured at the
tip is probably very close to pulmonary capillary pressure, which is very close to
left atrial pressure. A rise in pulmonary capillary wedge pressure is evidence of an
increase in preload on the left ventricle. In some cases, such as in mitral stenosis, it
is not agood index of left ventricular preload.
Along similar lines, measurement of systemic central venous pressure is used as an
index of preload.
Preload factor in systolic performance (Frank Starling mechanism)
The preload effect can be explained on the basis of a change in sarcomere length.
Length–Tension Relationship Frank Starling Mechanism
Active tension
5.0 Active tension 70 during systole
Tension 4.0 (mL 60
Volume
3.0 50
Relative
2.0 Stroke 40
1.0 30 Passive tension during diastole
Passive tension
0 0
1.2 2.2 50 100 150 200 250
Sarcomere Length (μm) Left Ventricular End Diastolic Volume
(mL) Index of Preload
Figure IV2 1. Length–Tension Relationships in Skeletal and Cardiac Muscle
Figure IV 1 1. Length–Tension Relationships in Skeletal and Cardiac Muscle
The resting length of skeletal muscle in vivo is at a sarcomere length close to the
optimum for maximal cross bridge linking between actin and myosin during
contraction (Lo).
Heart muscle at the end of diastole is below this point. Thus, in a normal heart,
increased preload increases sarcomere length toward the optimum actin myosin
overlap. This results in more cross linking and a more forceful contraction
during systole.
84
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 84 15/10/22 2:20PM
CHAPTER 2 | CARDIAC MUSCLE MECHANICS
Contractility (Inotropic State)
An acceptable definition of contractility would be a change in performance at a
given preload and afterload. Thus, contractility is a change in the force of contrac
tion at any given sarcomere length.
• Acute changes in contractility are due to changes in the intracellular
dynamics of calcium.
• Drugs that increase contractility usually provide more calcium and at a
faster rate to the contractile machinery.
• More calcium increases the availability of cross link sites on the actin,
increasing cross linking and the force of contraction during systole.
• Calcium dynamics do not explain chronic losses in contractility, which in
most cases are due to overall myocyte dysfunction.
Indices of contractility
Increased ejection fraction (stroke volume/end diastolic volume). Ejection
fraction can now be estimated fairly easily by a noninvasive technique and is
currently a common clinical index of contractility. There is no ideal index of
contractility. Ejection fraction is influenced by afterload, but in most cases an
increase in contractility is accompanied by an increase in ejection fraction.
Note that ejection fraction simply indicates the percentage of blood ejected from
the ventricle; it does not by itself give information about preload or stroke volume.
When contractility increases, there are changes in addition to an increased force of
contraction.
2
Solid line = left ventricular pressure
1
before (and the dashed line after) an
increase in contractility via increased
3
sympathetic stimulation
4
The numbers refer to the descriptions
after the figure.
Figure FigIVure 1IV2.2E2f.fecEtsffects ooff InInccrereaasseedd ContracCtoilnittyractility
85
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 85 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
The overall changes induced by increased contractility can be summarized as
follows:
1. Increased dp/dt (change in pressure vs. change in time): increased slope, thus
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences increased rate of pressure development
2. Increased peak left ventricular pressure due to a more forceful contraction
3. Increased rate of relaxation due to increased rate of calcium sequestration
4. Decreased systolic interval due to effects #1 and #3
Microbiology
Both an increased preload and an increased contractility are accompanied by an
increased peak left ventricular pressure, but only with an increase in contractility
is there a decrease in the systolic interval.
Whereas contractility affects systolic interval, heart rate determines diastolic
interval. Thus, increased sympathetic activity to the heart produces the following:
• Systolic interval decreased: contractility effect
• Diastolic interval decreased: heart rate effect
A high heart rate (pacemaker induced) produces a small increase in contractility
(Bowditch effect). Because Ca2+enters the cell more rapidly than it is sequestered
by the sarcoplasmic reticulum, cytosolic Ca2+ increases. The increased contractility
helps compensate for the reduced filling time associated with high heart rates.
Afterload
Afterload is the “load” against which the heart must eject blood. Exactly what
constitutes afterload to the heart is the subject of much debate. Probably, the best
“marker” of afterload is systemic vascular resistance (SVR), also called total
peripheral resistance (TPR). However, TPR is not routinely calculated clinically
and thus arterial pressure (diastolic, mean, or systolic) is often used as the index of
afterload.
Afterload is increased in 3 main situations:
• When aortic pressure is increased (elevated mean arterial pressure); for
example, when hypertension increases the afterload, the left ventricle has
to work harder to overcome the elevated arterial pressures
• When SVR is increased
• In aortic stenosis, resulting in pressure overload of the left ventricle
In general, when afterload increases, there is an initial fall in stroke volume.
86
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 86 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 2 | CARDIAC MUSCLE MECHANICS
VENTRICULAR FUNCTION CURVES
Ventricular function curves are an excellent graphical depiction of the effects of
preload versus contractility and afterload.
100
(mL
50
SV
0
0 10 20
LVEDP (mm Hg)
Figure IV 1 3. Family of Frank Starling Curves
Figure IV 2 3. Family of Frank Starling Curves
Changes in afterload and contractility shift the curve up or down, left or right.
There is no single Frank Starling curve on which the ventricle operates. There is
actually a family of curves, each of which is defined by the afterload and the
inotropic state of the heart:
• Increasing afterload and decreasing contractility shift the curve down and
to the right.
• Decreasing afterload and increasing contractility shift the curve up and to
the left.
Application of Ventricular Function Curves
A ventricular function curve is the rise in ventricular performance as preload
increases (Frank Starling curve). Thus:
• All points on a ventricular function curve have the same contractility.
• All curves have an ascending limb, a peak point, and possibly a descend
ing limb.
• The pericardium normally prevents the large increases in preload neces
sary to reach the peak of a cardiac function curve.
87
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 87 15/10/22 2:20PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
E
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences B
Performanc
-axis: index of systolic performance, C
e.g., stroke work, stroke volume, cardiac
output; all are indices of the force of III IV
Microbiologyventricular contraction N
I II
Systolic
-axis: index of ventricular preload,
D F
e.g., ventricular end diastolic volume
or pressure, RAP, or CVP
A
Ventricular Preload
Figure IV 1 4. Ventricular Function Vectors
Figure IV 2 4. Ventricular Function Vectors
Starting at N, which represents a normal, resting individual:
• A = decreased performance due to a reduction in preload
• B = increased performance due to an increased preload
Starting at N, point C represents an increased performance due to an increase in
contractility or a reduction in afterload.
• Any point above a ventricular function curve means increased contractil
ity, or an acute decrease in afterload.
• Any point below a ventricular function curve means decreased contractil
ity, or an acute increase in afterload.
Points C, D, and E represent different levels of performance due to changes in
preload only (Frank Starling mechanism); all 3 points have the same contractility.
Vector I: consequences of a loss in preload, e.g., hemorrhage, venodilators (nitro
glycerin)
• Performance decreases because of a loss in preload.
• The loss of venous return and preload reduces cardiac output and blood
pressure, and via the carotid sinus, reflex sympathetic stimulation to the
heart increases.
• The increased contractility partially compensates for the loss of preload.
• When there is a loss of either preload or contractility that compromises
performance, the other factor usually increases to return performance
toward normal. However, the compensatory mechanism is usually
incomplete.
88
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 88 15/10/22 2:20PM
CHAPTER 2 | CARDIAC MUSCLE MECHANICS
Vector II: consequences of a loss in contractility, e.g., congestive heart failure
• Performance decreases because of a loss in contractility.
• A decrease in contractility decreases ejection fraction, which increases
preload.
• The increased preload partially compensates for the loss of contractility.
• An acute increase in afterload, e.g., peripheral vasoconstriction, produces
the same change.
Vector III: consequences of an acute increase in contractility
• Performance increases.
• The increased contractility increases ejection fraction.
• The increased ejection fraction decreases preload.
• An acute decrease in afterload, e.g., peripheral vasodilation, produces the
same shift in the curve.
Vector IV: consequences of an acute increase in preload, e.g., volume loading in
the individual going from the upright to the supine position.
• Increased venous return increases preload, which increases performance
and cardiac output.
• Increasing cardiac output raises blood pressure, and via the carotid sinus
reflex, sympathetic stimulation to the heart decreases.
• The decreased sympathetic stimulation reduces contractility.
All of the preceding sequences assume no dramatic change in heart rate, which
could reduce or eliminate some of the expected changes. Whenever there is a
change in sympathetic stimulation to the heart, there is a change in both contrac
tility and heart rate.
Ventricular Volumes
End diastolic volume (EDV): volume of blood in the ventricle at the end of
diastole
End systolic volume (ESV): volume of blood in the ventricle at the end of systole
Stroke volume (SV): volume of blood ejected by the ventricle per beat
SV = EDV − ESV
Ejection fraction (EF): EF = SV/EDV (>55% in a normal heart)
89
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 89 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
CHRONIC CHANGES: SYSTOLIC AND DIASTOLIC
DYSFUNCTION
Systolic dysfunction is an abnormal reduction in ventricular emptying due to
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
impaired contractility or excessive afterload.
Diastolic dysfunction is a reduction in ventricular compliance i.e., the ventricle is
stiffer. Reduced compliance causes an elevated diastolic pressure for any given
volume. EDV is often reduced, but compensatory mechanisms may result in a
Microbiology
normal EDV (although end diastolic pressure is elevated at this “normal” EDV).
Pressure Overload
• Examples of a pressure overload on the left ventricle include hypertension
and aortic stenosis.
• Initially, there is no decrease in cardiac output or an increase in preload
since the cardiac function curve shifts to the left (increased performance
due to increased contractility).
• Chronically, in an attempt to normalize wall tension (actually internal
wall stress), the ventricle develops a concentric hypertrophy. There is a
dramatic increase in wall thickness and a decrease in chamber diameter.
• The consequence of concentric hypertrophy (new sarcomeres laid down in
parallel, i.e., the myofibril thickens) is a decrease in ventricular compliance
and diastolic dysfunction, followed eventually by a systolic dysfunction
and ventricular failure.
Volume Overload
• Examples of a volume overload on the left ventricle include mitral and
aortic insufficiency and patent ductus arteriosus.
• Fairly well tolerated if developed slowly. A large acute volume overload less
well tolerated and can precipitate heart failure.
• Due to the LaPlace relationship, a dilated left ventricle must develop a
greater wall tension to produce the same ventricular pressures.
P=T/r
r
The greater the radius, the greater the
wall tension needed to generate the same
ventricular pressure.
Figure IV 1 5
Figure IV 2 5.
• Chronically, in an attempt to normalize wall tension (actually external
wall stress), the ventricle develops an eccentric hypertrophy (new sarco
meres laid down end to end, i.e., the myofibril lengthens).
90
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 90 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 2 | CARDIAC MUSCLE MECHANICS
As cardiac volumes increase, there is a modest increase in wall thickness that does
not reduce chamber size.
• Compliance of the ventricle is not compromised and diastolic function is
maintained.
• Eventual failure is usually a consequence of systolic dysfunction.
Cardiomyopathy
Cardiac failure or more specifically, congestive failure, is a syndrome with many
etiologies. Cardiomyopathy is a failure of the myocardium where the underlying
cause originates within the myocyte (excluded would be valvular heart disease,
afterload problems, and coronary heart disease).
There are 3 basic types:
• Dilated cardiomyopathy
• Restrictive cardiomyopathy
• Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Dilated cardiomyopathy is ventricular dilation with only a modest hypertrophy
that is less than appropriate for the degree of dilation. It can occur for the left
heart, right heart, or can include both.
• Diastolic function remains intact and helps compensate for the chamber
dilation.
• Compensation also includes increased sympathetic stimulation to the
myocardium.
• Systolic dysfunction despite compensations via Frank Starling and
increased contractility
• Further dilation over time and mitral and tricuspid failure enhance
systolic dysfunction with eventual complete failure.
Restrictive cardiomyopathy
Restrictive cardiomyopathy is decreased ventricular compliance with diastolic
dysfunction and a decrease in ventricular cavity size.
• Increased filling pressures lead to left and right sided congestion.
• Ventricular hypertrophy may or may not be present.
• Systolic maintained close to normal
91
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 91 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
• Septal or left ventricular hypertrophy is unrelated to a pressure overload.
• Diastolic dysfunction due to increased muscle stiffness and impaired
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences relaxation
• Is a subtype of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, often resulting in a restric
tion of the ventricular outflow tract (idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic
stenosis) and pulmonary congestion. Currently this is referred to clinically
Microbiology as hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM).
• Hypertrophy may be related to septal fiber disarray.
Recall Question
Which of the following physiological changes is characteristic of
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, as opposed to other types of
cardiomyopathies?
A. Septal hypertrophy unrelated to pressure overload
B. Decreased ventricular compliance
C. Ventricular dilation with intact diastolic function
D. Systolic dysfunction with mitral valve failure
E. Increased filling pressures leading to left and right sided
congestion
Answer: A
92
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 92 15/10/22 2:20P
3#
CV Regulation and Cardiac Output
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Answer questions on short term regulation of systemic arterial pressure
❏ Demonstrate understanding wall tension and the application of the
LaPlace relationship
SHORT TERM REGULATION OF SYSTEMIC
ARTERIAL PRESSURE
Application of Hemodynamics to the Systemic Circulation
A simplified model of the circulation can be used to examine whole body cardio
vascular regulation. Blood flows from the aorta to the large arteries that supply the
various organs. Within each organ, there are muscular arterioles that serve as the
primary site of resistance.
The sum of these resistors (added as reciprocals because of the parallel arrange
ment) is TPR/SVR. This represents afterload to the heart.
To think about whole body cardiovascular regulation, it is helpful to apply our
basic hemodynamic principle in the following way:
MAP = CO × TPR
where MAP is mean arterial pressure, CO is cardiac output, and TPR is total
peripheral resistance.
93
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 93 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Lungs
Cerebral
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
LA
RA
Coronary
RV LV
Microbiology
Liver
Stomach, Spleen
Pancreas
Endocrine
glands Intestines
Kidneys
Skin, Muscle, Bone
Figure V F1igu9re. SIyVstem3ic1. SystemiCcircuitCircuit
There are 2 functional consequences related to the fact arterioles serve as the
primary site of resistance (TPR):
• They regulate blood flow to the capillaries (site of exchange with the
tissue).
• They regulate upstream pressure, which is mean arterial pressure (MAP).
Tissues need nutrient delivery and thus have mechanisms to regulate the tone
of arterioles (intrinsic regulation, discussed in the next chapter). However, from a
whole body perspective it is imperative to maintain an adequate MAP because this
is the pressure head (upstream pressure) for the entire body (extrinsic regulation).
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY Given the above, consider arterioles to effectively function as faucets. The tissues
need to regulate the faucet to ensure adequate nutrient delivery (intrinsic regula
Sepsis, anaphylaxis, and neurogenic shock
tion). On the other hand, these arterioles need a sufficient tone to maintain MAP
are examples of uncontrolled vasodilation in
(extrinsic regulation). If all the faucets were fully opened simultaneously then
the periphery, leading to diminished MAP. upstream pressure (MAP) plummets, in turn compromising blood flow to all the
organs. Thus, a balance must exist with respect to the level of arteriolar tone (“how
tight the faucet is”) so there is enough flow to meet the metabolic demands
without compromising MAP.
A variety of extrinsic mechanisms exist to regulate arterioles and thus maintain an
adequate MAP.
94
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 94 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 3 | CV REGULATION AND CARDIAC OUTPUT
Factors that cause vasoconstriction, resulting in increased MAP and reduced flow BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
to the capillary include:
Drugs that mimic NE cause the same
• Norepinephrine (NE) released from sympathetic postganglionic neurons cardiovascular effects that NE produces.
These include alpha 1 agonists, NE
– NE binds alpha 1 receptors to activate Gq, which increases cytosolic
calcium in smooth muscle cells, in turn causing vasoconstriction. The releasers, and NE reuptake inhibitors.
sympathetic nervous system is the dominant regulator of vascular tone
and has a tonic effect on skeletal muscle and cutaneous vessels at rest.
During times of stress, it can exert its effects on the splanchnic and
renal circulations as well.
• Epinephrine (EPI) released from the adrenal medulla also activates alpha 1
receptors.
• Ang II via the AT1 receptor (Gq)
• AVP (or ADH) via the V1 receptor (Gq)
Vasodilation of arterioles results in a drop in MAP with an increased flow to
capillaries (provided MAP doesn’t fall too much). Vasodilatory mechanisms
include:
BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
• Decreased sympathetic activity: reduced NE release decreases alpha 1
vasoconstriction Drugs that block NE’s vascular effects (alpha
blockers), prevent NE release, liberate NO,
• EPI stimulates vascular beta 2 receptors (Gs–cAMP)
activate beta 2 receptors, block calcium
• Nitric oxide (NO): tonically released from vascular endothelium and
entry into smooth muscle cells, and/or open
activates soluble guanylyl cyclase to increase smooth muscle cGMP
smooth muscle potassium channels mimic
• A variety of compounds produced by tissue metabolism, e.g., adenosine,
the vasodilatory effects indicated.
CO2, K+, and H+
Arterial Baroreceptors
The baroreceptor reflex is the short term regulation of blood pressure. Its main
features can be seen below.
IX
Medulla
Carotid
sinus Sympathetic
Parasympathetic
X
Heart Heart Arterioles Venous
HR HR + cont. TPR constriction
Aortic
arch
Figure V 1 8. Baroreflexes
Figure IV 3 2. Baroreflexes
The reninangiotensin aldosterone system is the long term regulation of blood
pressure.
95
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 95 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Key points regarding arterial baroreceptors:
• Mechanoreceptors embedded in the walls of the aortic arch and carotid
sinus are stimulated by a rise in intravascular pressure.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences • Afferent activity is relayed to the medulla via cranial nerves IX (carotid
sinus) and X (aortic arch).
• Baroreceptor activity exists at the person’s resting arterial blood pressure.
• Afferent activity stimulates the parasympathetic nervous system and
Microbiology
inhibits the sympathetic nervous system.
• A fall in arterial blood pressure evokes a reflex decrease in parasympa
thetic activity and increase in sympathetic activity. This is a negative
feedback system to bring blood pressure back to its original level.
• A rise in arterial blood pressure evokes a reflex increase in parasympa
thetic activity and fall in sympathetic activity. This is a negative feedback
system to bring blood pressure back to its original level.
• Activation of arterial baroreceptors inhibits the secretion of ADH.
Table IV 3 1. Reflex Changes for Specific Maneuvers
Condition Afferent Parasympathetic Sympathetic
Activity Activity Activity
BP increase ↑ ↑ ↓
BP decrease ↓ ↓ ↑ BP HR
Carotid occlusion ↓ ↓ ↑ ↑ ↑
Carotid massage ↑ ↑ ↓ ↓ ↓
Cut afferents ↓ ↓ ↑ ↑ ↑
Lying to stand ↓ ↓ ↑ ↑ toward ↑
Orthostatic normal
hypotension
Fluid loss
Volume load ↑ ↑ ↓ ↓ toward ↓
Weightlessness normal
Cardiopulmonary Mechanoreceptors (Baroreceptors)
Mechanoreceptors are embedded in the walls of the heart (all 4 chambers), great
veins (superior/inferior vena cava near the heart), where they empty into the right
atrium, and pulmonary artery.
• Afferent activity is relayed to the medulla via cranial nerve X (vagus).
• Because this region is highly compliant, volume changes are the primary
stimulus.
• A reduction in volume in the heart and/or the vessels leading to the heart
evokes a reflex increase in SNS activity and a decrease in PNS activity.
96
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 96 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 3 | CV REGULATION AND CARDIAC OUTPUT
• A rise in volume in the heart and/or the vessels leading to the heart evokes
a reflex decrease in SNS activity and an increase in PNS activity.
• Similar to arterial baroreceptors, this represents a negative feedback
regulation of arterial blood pressure. Further, like arterial baroreceptors,
activation of these receptors inhibits ADH release.
VENOUS RETURN
To understand vascular function and thus the regulation of cardiac output, one
can “split” the circulation into 2 components:
• Cardiac output (CO): flow of blood exiting the heart (down arrow on the
arterial side).
• Venous return (VR): flow of blood returning to the heart (up arrow on the
venous side). Because this is the flow of blood to the heart, it determines
preload for the ventricles (assuming normal ventricular function).
Because the circulation is a closed system, these flows are intertwined and must be
the same when one examines it “over time” or at steady state. In addition, each
flow is “dependent” on the other. For example:
• If CO fell to zero, then ultimately VR would become zero.
• If one were to stop VR, there would ultimately be no CO.
These are extreme examples to illustrate the point that altering one ultimately
alters the other and a variety of factors can transiently or permanently alter each of
the variables, resulting in the other variable being impacted to the same degree.
Earlier in this book we discussed ventricular function, which plays a pivotal role in
CO. In this section, we discuss the regulation of VR. VR represents vascular
function, and thus understanding its regulation sets the stage for understanding
CO regulation.
CVP: central venous pressure
Pulm IPP: intrapleural pressure
RH circ. LH
LH: left heart
CVP/
0 IPP
RAP –5 MABP: mean arterial blood pressure
Psf: mean systemic filling pressure
93 MABP RH: right heart
Psf 7 RAP: right atrial pressure
Capillaries
Figure VFig1ure11.IVP3res3su.rePressure GrGardaidenietnsts in tihne tCheirculaCtoirryculatorSyystem System
97
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 97 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
VR is the flow of blood back to the heart and it determines preload. Since it is a
flow, it must follow the hemodynamic principles described above, i.e., it is directly
proportional to the pressure gradient and inversely related to the resistance.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences • Right atrial pressure (RAP): blood is flowing to the right atrium, thus
RAP is the downstream pressure.
• Mean systemic filling pressure (Psf): represents the upstream pressure
(pressure head) for VR.
Microbiology
NOTE Mean systemic filling pressure (Psf): Although not a “theoretical” pressure (as
per numerous experiments, Psf is typically ~7 mm Hg prior to endogenous
Engaging the muscle pump also increases Psf.
compensations), this is not a pressure that can be conveniently
measured, particularly in a patient. However, because it is the pressure when no
flow exists, it is primarily determined by volume and compliance:
• There is a direct relationship between blood volume and Psf. The greater
the blood volume, the higher the Psf and vice versa.
• There is an inverse relationship between venous compliance and Psf. The
more compliant the veins, the lower the Psf and vice versa.
Because Psf is the pressure head (upstream pressure) driving VR, then VR is
directly related to Psf. If all other factors are unchanged, it follows that:
• An increase in blood volume increases VR.
• A decrease in blood volume decreases VR.
• A decrease in venous compliance (sympathetic stimulation; muscle pump)
increases VR.
• An increase in venous compliance (sympathetic inhibition; venodilators;
alpha block) decreases VR.
DETERMINANTS OF CARDIAC OUTPUT
Because VR plays an important role in determining cardiac output (CO), we can
now discuss the regulation of CO. The key to remember is that steady state CO is
the interplay between ventricular function (see ventricular function curves in the
previous chapter) and vascular function, which is defined by VR curves.
The 4 determinants are as follows:
• Heart rate
• Contractility
• Afterload
• Preload (determined by VR)
The latter 3 factors can be combined on CO/VR curves, which are illustrated and
discussed later.
98
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 98 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 3 | CV REGULATION AND CARDIAC OUTPUT
Heart Rate
CO = HR × SV (stroke volume)
Although heart rate (HR) and CO are directly related, the effect of changes in HR
on CO is complicated because the other variable, SV, must be considered. High
heart rates decrease filling time for the ventricles, and thus can decrease SV. In
short, the effect of HR on CO depends upon the cause of the rise in HR.
Endogenously mediated tachycardia, e.g., exercise
In exercise, the rise in HR increases CO. Although filling time is reduced, a variety
of changes occur that prevent SV from falling. These are:
• Sympathetic stimulation to the heart increases contractility. This helps
maintain stroke volume. In addition, this decreases the systolic interval
(see previous chapter). thus preserving some of the diastolic filling time.
• Sympathetic stimulation increases conduction velocity in the heart,
thereby increasing the rate of transmission of the electrical impulse.
• Sympathetic stimulation venoconstricts, which helps preserve VR (see
above) and ventricular filling.
• The skeletal muscle pump increases VR, helping to maintain ventricular
filling.
Pathologically mediated tachycardia, e.g., tachyarrhythmias
• The sudden increase in HR curtails ventricular filling resulting in a fall in
CO.
• Although the fall in CO decreases MAP and activates the sympathetic
nervous system, this occurs “after the fact” and is thus unable to compensate.
• There is no muscle pump to increase VR.
CO
HR
Figure V 1 12
Figure IV3 4
Contractility
There is a direct relationship between contractility and ventricular output. Thus,
there is typically a direct relationship between contractility and CO.
99
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 99 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Afterload
Afterload is the load the heart works against and the best marker of afterload is
TPR. There is an inverse relation between afterload and ventricular output, thus
there is generally an inverse relation between afterload and CO.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Preload
As discussed earlier, there is a direct relation between preload and ventricular
Microbiology
output (Frank Starling). Presuming there is no change in contractility or afterload,
increasing preload increases CO and vice versa.
Cardiac Output/Venous Return Curves
Cardiac output/venous return (CO/VR) curves depict the interplay between
ventricular and vascular function indicated in the venous return section above.
Steady state CO is determined by this interplay.
Ventricular function
• x axis is RAP, a marker of preload.
• y axis is CO.
• Thus, this curve is the same as depicted in both figures below, and it
defines ventricular function.
• This curve shows that RAP has a positive impact on CO (Frank Starling
mechanism) (see figure IV 2 4)
Vascular function
• x axis is RAP, the downstream pressure for VR.
• y axis is VR.
• The curve shows that as RAP increases, VR decreases. This is because
RAP is the downstream pressure for VR. As RAP increases, the pressure
gradient for VR falls, which in turn decreases VR. Thus, RAP has a
negative impact on VR.
• x intercept for the VR curve is Psf (point B on the graph). This is the
pressure in the circulation when there is no flow (see section on venous
return). Psf is the pressure head (upstream pressure) for VR. Thus, when
RAP = Psf, flow (VR) is zero.
Steady state CO
The intersection of the ventricular and vascular function curves determines
steady state CO (point A in the figure below). In other words, point A represents
the interplay between ventricular and vascular function.
• Discounting HR, the only way steady state CO can change is if ventricular
function, or vascular function, or both change.
100
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 100 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 3 | CV REGULATION AND CARDIAC OUTPUT
Solid line: ventricular function
Dashed line: vascular function
A
A = steady state cardiac output
CO/VR
All individuals operate at the intersection
of the ventricular function and venous
return curves.
B B = mean systemic filling
pressure (Psf)
Right Atrial Pressure (RAP)
This is directly related to vascular volume
Figure V 1 13
Figure IV3 5 and inversely related to venous
compliance.
Resistance
The primary site of resistance for the circulation is the arterioles.
• If arterioles vasodilate (decreased resistance), VR increases (line A of the
figure below). Recall that VR is a flow, and thus decreasing resistance
increases flow. Note that this vasodilation provides more VR (move up the
Frank Starling curve).
Although not depicted in the graph, vasodilation decreases afterload and
thus shifts the ventricular function curve up and to the left. In short,
arteriolar vasodilation enhances both ventricular and vascular function.
• If arterioles vasoconstrict (increased resistance), VR falls (line B of the
figure below). Note that this vasoconstriction reduces VR, and steady state
CO falls as one moves down the Frank Starling curve.
Psf
As indicated above (venous return section), Psf is directly related to blood volume
and inversely related to venous compliance.
• Increasing vascular volume (infusion; activation of RAAS) or decreasing
venous compliance (sympathetic stimulation; muscle pump; exercise)
increases Psf, causing a right shift in the VR curve (line C of figure below).
Thus, either of these changes enhances filling of the ventricles (move up
the Frank Starling curve) and CO.
• Decreasing vascular volume (hemorrhage; burn trauma; vomiting;
diarrhea) or increasing venous compliance (inhibit sympathetics; alpha
block; venodilators) decreases Psf, causing a left shift in the VR curve (line
D of figure below). Thus, either of these changes reduces filling of the
ventricles (move down the Frank Starling curve) and CO.
101
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 101 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Although not depicted in the figure,
vasoconstriction increases afterload,
shifting the ventricular function curve
Pathologydown and to the right. BeThhauvsi,oraSlacriteenrcioe/lSarociaSlciences A
vasoconstriction reduces both ventricular CO/VR CO/VR C
and vascular function.
B
D
Microbiology
A: arteriolar dilation
B: arteriolar constriction RAP RAP
C: increased vascular volume; decreased Figure V 1 14
Figure IV 3 6
venous compliance
D: decreased vascular volume; increased
venous compliance
EFFECT OF GRAVITY
Solid circles represent starting CO. Venous Arterial
pressure pressure
– Gravity – Gravity
NOTE
The Effect of Gravity 2 mm Hg H 100 mm Hg
Case 1. When placing a central line in the
internal jugular or subclavian vein of a
patient in the medical intensive care unit,
place the patient in the Trendelenburg + Gravity
+ Gravity
position, in which the deep veins of the (~80 mm Hg)
upper extremity are below the level of the
heart. This position makes the venous
pressure less negative, thus reducing the risk 82 mm Hg 180 mm Hg
of forming an “air embolus,” in which the
needle forms a connection between the Figure IV 3 7. Effect of Gravity
Figure V 1 15. Effect of Gravity
positive atmospheric pressure and the
negative vein. Below heart level, there are equal increases in systemic arterial and venous
pressures (assuming no muscular action). Thus, the pressure difference between
Case 2. To take an accurate blood pressure arteries and veins does not change.
reading, place the sphygmomanometer at
Because veins are very compliant vessels, the higher pressures in the dependent
the level of the heart. If the cuff is above the
veins mean a significant pooling of blood, a volume that is not contributing to
level of the heart, the reading will be falsely
cardiac output. Although venous compliance doesn’t “technically” increase,
low; conversely, if the cuff is below the level gravity’s impact is functionally the same as an increase in venous compliance.
of the heart, the reading will be falsely high.
When a person goes from supine to an upright posture, the following important
changes take place:
• Pressure in the dependent veins increases.
• Blood volume in the dependent veins increases.
• VR decreases.
• If no compensations occurred, then MAP falls because of the diminished SV.
102
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 102 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 3 | CV REGULATION AND CARDIAC OUTPUT
The initial compensation arises from cardiopulmonary mechanoreceptors BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY/
(described previously in this chapter), which, because their stretch is reduced,
PHARMACOLOGY
activate the SNS and inhibit the PNS.
The inability to maintain MAP when standing
The reflex activation of the sympathetic nervous system causes: upright is called orthostatic intolerance.
• Arteriolar vasoconstriction (TPR increases) • Fall in MAP reduces cerebral blood
• Increase in HR flow, causing patient to feel dizzy/
light headed
• Venoconstriction
• Can lead to a syncope event
If MAP falls, then the arterial baroreceptors also participate in the reflex changes.
• Commonly caused by reduced vascular
Above heart level, systemic arterial pressure progressively decreases. Because
volume: the low volume reduces VR,
venous pressure at heart level is close to zero, venous pressure quickly becomes
and the added fall in VR(due to
subatmospheric (negative).
venous pooling) overwhelms the
Surface veins above the heart cannot maintain a significant pressure below
compensatory mechanisms
atmospheric and will collapse; however, deep veins and those inside the cranium
supported by the tissue can maintain a pressure that is significantly below atmo • Other causes include venodilator use,
spheric. A consequence of the preceding is that a severed or punctured vein above poor ventricular function (heart failure
heart level has the potential for introducing air into the system.
or cardiac transplant), and
dysautonomias
CHARACTERISTICS OF SYSTEMIC ARTERIES
The following figure shows a pressure pulse for a major systemic artery.
Systolic blood pressure
120
pressur
Pulse
Hg)
Mean arterial
pressure
(mm
80
Diastolic blood pressure
Pressure
40
0
Figure VFigur1e 16I.V3Pu8ls.ePulsePrePsrseusrseure andandMeanMePanressure Pressure
Pulse pressure equals systolic minus diastolic, so here, pulse pressure is 120 – 80 =
40 mm Hg.
103
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 103 15/10/22 2:20PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Factors Affecting Systolic Pressure
Systolic blood pressure is the highest pressure in the systemic arteries during the
cardiac cycle. The main factor determining systolic blood pressure on a beat to
beat basis is stroke volume.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
• An increase in stroke volume increases systolic blood pressure, while a
decrease in stroke volume decreases systolic blood pressure.
• Systolic blood pressure is also directly related to ventricular contractil
Microbiology ity. In addition, the rate of pressure change in the aorta is directly
related to contractility. Thus, if contractility increases, then the rate
of pressure and the absolute level of aortic pressure increases, and
vice versa.
• In chronic conditions, a decrease in the compliance of the systemic
arteries (age related arteriosclerosis) also increases systolic blood
pressure.
Factors Affecting Diastolic Pressure
Diastolic blood pressure is directly related to the volume of blood left in the aorta
at the end of diastole. One important factor determining diastolic blood pressure is
TPR.
• Dilation of the arterioles decreases diastolic blood pressure, while
constriction of the arterioles increases diastolic blood pressure.
• HR is the second key factor influencing diastolic pressure and they are
directly related: increased HR increases diastolic blood pressure, while
decreased HR decreases diastolic blood pressure.
• Diastolic blood pressure is also directly related to SV, but this is typically
not a major factor.
NOTE Factors Affecting Pulse Pressure
Theoretically, the systemic pulse pressure The following increase (widen) pulse pressure:
can be conceptualized as being proportional
• An increase in stroke volume (systolic increases more than diastolic)
to stroke volume, or the amount of blood
• A decrease in vessel compliance (systolic increases and diastolic
ejected from the left ventricle during systole,
decreases)
and inversely proportional to the compliance
of the aorta. The aorta is the most compliant artery in the arterial system. Peripheral arteries
are more muscular and less compliant. Based on the preceding information, in the
figure below the pressure record on the left best represents the aorta, whereas the
one on the right best represents the femoral artery.
Mean pressure
Figure VFigu1re17.IVC3om9p.liaCnocmepliance anadnd PPuulslsee PressPurreessure
The figure demonstrates that a compliant artery has a small pulse pressure and
that a stiff artery has a large pulse pressure. Also, pulse pressure increases with
104
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 104 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 3 | CV REGULATION AND CARDIAC OUTPUT
age because compliance is decreasing. This can produce isolated systolic hyperten
sion, in which mean pressure is normal because the elevated systolic pressure is
associated with a reduced diastolic pressure.
Factors Affecting Mean Pressure
Mean pressure is pressure averaged over time. It is not the arithmetic mean and is
closer to diastolic pressure than to systolic pressure.
Mean pressure can be approximated by the following formulas:
For a blood pressure of 120/80 mm Hg:
Mean pressure = diastolic + 1/3 pulse pressure
80 + 1/3(40) = 93 mm Hg
= 2/3 diastolic pressure + 1/3 systolic pressure
2/3(80) + 1/3(120) = 93 mm Hg
Any formula that calculates mean pressure must give a value between systolic and
diastolic but closer to diastolic than systolic.
The factors affecting mean pressure (application of hemodynamics discussed
above) include:
Q: cardiac output
P1: aortic pressure (mean arterial pressure)
P2: pressure at the entrance of the right atrium
R: resistance of all vessels in the systemic circuit (referred to as TPR)
Because the major component of TPR is the arterioles, TPR can be considered an
index of arteriolar resistance.
Because P1 is a very large number (93 mm Hg) and P2 is a very small one (~0 mm
Hg), that doesn’t change dramatically in most situations, we can simplify the
equation if we approximate P2 as zero. Then:
MAP: mean arterial pressure
CO = _MTPARP or MAP = CO × TPR CO: cardiac output
TPR: total peripheral resistance
This equation simply states that:
• MAP is determined by only 2 variables: cardiac output and TPR.
• CO is the circulating volume. The blood stored in the systemic veins and
the pulmonary circuit would not be included in this volume.
• TPR is the resistance of all vessels in the systemic circuit. By far the largest
component is the resistance in the arterioles.
• However, if venous or right atrial pressure (RAP) is severely increased, it
must be taken into account when estimating TPR. In this case, the
formula is:
(MAP − RAP) = CO × TPR
(_M__A_P_____−__RAP)
or rearranged to solve for resistance: TPR =
CO
105
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 105 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Recall Question
Which of the following is accurate regarding mean systemic filling
pressure (Psf)?
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
A. IV fluid infusion decreases mean systemic filling pressure
B. Exercising decreases mean systemic filling pressure
Microbiology C. The volume of blood and the mean systemic filling pressure
are proportional
D. Venous compliance and mean systemic filling pressure are
directly related
E. Decreasing vascular volume causes mean systemic filling
pressure to increase
Answer: C
106
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 106 15/10/22 2:20P
4#
Regulation of Blood Flow
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Demonstrate understanding of Fick principle of blood flow
❏ Interpret scenarios on blood flow regulation
❏ Explain information related to blood flow to the various organs
❏ Demonstrate understanding of fetal circulation
❏ Explain information related to cardiovascular stress: exercise
NOTE
FICK PRINCIPLE OF BLOOD FLOW
The Fick principle was first devised as a
The Fick principle can be utilized to calculate the blood flow through an or
gan. Calculation of flow through the pulmonary circuit provides a measure of the technique for measuring CO. It is a way to
cardiac output (CO). calculate oxygen consumption (VO2).
_uptake VO2 = CO × (CaO2 - CvO2)
Flow =
A - V
CaO2 = total arterial oxygen
Required data are: oxygen consumption of the organ content
A – V oxygen content (concentration) difference across organ (not PO2) (Hgb × 1.36 × SaO2) + PaO2 ×
0.0031
Pulmonary venous (systemic arterial)
These values are obtained from an ABG.
oxygen content = 20 vol%
CvO2 = total venous oxygen content
= 20 volumes O2 per 100 volumes blood
= 20 mL O2 per 100 mL blood (Hgb × 1.36 × SvO2) + PvO2 ×
= 0.2 mL O2 per mL blood 0.0031
If pulmonary vessel data are not available, you may substitute arterial oxygen These values are obtained from a central
content for pulmonary venous blood and use venous oxygen content in place of venous or Swan Ganz catheter, which
pulmonary artery values. samples blood from the pulmonary artery.
The (CaO2 - CvO2) and CO are the 2 main
factors that allow variation in the body’s
total oxygen consumption.
107
04_USMLE_Preclinical_PartIV_Ch04.indd 107 10/6/22 3:34P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
In a normal resting individual, that would appear as follows:
O2 consumption
250 mL O2/min
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Microbiology
Alveolus
Pulmonary artery Pulmonary vein
O2
[O2] pa [O2] pv
0.15 mL O2/mL blood 0.20 mL O2/mL blood
Pulmonary capillary
FigurFeigure VIV24 11..AlvAelovleaorlar OxygenOxyUgepntake Uptake
Q (flow) = _o_x_y_g_en_____c_o_n_s_u_mption
[O2] pv - [O2] pa
= _ 0 _ .2 _ 0 ____ m _ L __ /m _2_5 L _0___m_ - L__/m 0 in .15 mL/mL = 5,000 mL/min
___c_a_rd_i_a_c_____output
Cardiac index =
body surface area
This would normalize the value for body size.
Application of the Fick Principle
Rearranging the Fick Principle to O2 consumption = Q × (CaO2 - CvO2) can be
applied to important concepts regarding homeostatic mechanisms and pathologic
alterations. CaO2 - CvO2 represents the extraction of O2 by the tissue.
O2 consumption
O2 consumption is dependent upon flow and the extraction of O2. If tissue O2 con
sumption increases, then flow or extraction or both must increase.
• The rise in flow in response to a rise in tissue O2 consumption is the result
of increased production of vasodilator metabolites (see metabolic mecha
nism below).
• In short, this change in flow and extraction represents homeostatic
mechanisms designed to ensure adequate O2 availability and thus suffi
cient ATP production.
108
04_USMLE_Preclinical_PartIV_Ch04.indd 108 10/6/22 3:34P
CHAPTER 4 | REGULATION OF BLOOD FLOW
O2 delivery
The “first part” of the Fick Principle indicates that delivery of O2to the tissue is
dependent upon Q and the total amount of O2 in the blood (CaO2).
O2 delivery = Q × CaO2
• For any given tissue O2 consumption, reduced delivery of O2 results in
increased lactic acid production and possible hypoxic/ischemic damage to
tissues.
• For any given tissue O2 consumption, if O2 delivery decreases, then PvO2
and SvO2% fall.
Clinical application: A fall in PvO2 or SvO2% indicates the patient’s O2 consump
tion increased and/or there was a fall in O2 delivery (Q and/or CaO2).
Organ X
O2 CO2
Arterial Venous
PO2 = 100 PO2 < 100
PCO2 = 40 PCO2 > 40
Figure IV4 2. Application of the Fick Principle
Figure V 2 2. Application of the Fick Principle
BLOOD FLOW REGULATION
Flow is regulated by constricting and dilating the smooth muscle surrounding the
arterioles.
Intrinsic Regulation (Autoregulation)
The control mechanisms regulating the arteriolar smooth muscle are entirely
within the organ itself.
• What is regulated is blood flow, not resistance. It is more correct to say
that resistance is changed in order to regulate flow.
• No nerves or circulating substances are involved in autoregulation. Thus,
the autonomic nervous system and circulating epinephrine have nothing
to do with autoregulation.
There are 2 main mechanisms that explain autoregulation.
Metabolic mechanism
• The tissue produces vasodilator metabolites that regulate flow, e.g.,
adenosine, CO2, H+, and K+.
• A dilation of the arterioles is produced when the concentration of these
metabolites increases in the tissue. The arterioles constrict if the tissue
concentration decreases.
109
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 109 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Myogenic mechanism
• Increased perfusing pressure causes stretch of the arteriolar wall and the
surrounding smooth muscle.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences • Because an inherent property of the smooth muscle is to contract when
stretched, the arteriole radius decreases, and flow does not increase
significantly.
Microbiology
Major characteristics of an autoregulating tissue
Blood flow should be independent of blood pressure.
This phenomenon is demonstrated for a theoretically perfect autoregulating
tissue. The range of pressure over which flow remains nearly constant is the
autoregulatory range.
Normal 2× Autoregulatory range
Need for vasodilators
(e.g., nicardipine,
1× nitroprusside, hydralazine)
×
( Need for vasopressors
Flow (e.g., norepinephrine,
0.5×
dopamine, phenylephrine)
0 50 100 150
Blood Pressure (mm Hg)
Figure V 2 3. AutoreIgVula4tio3n.FigAuruetoregulation
Blood flow in most cases is proportional to tissue metabolism. Blood flow is
independent of nervous reflexes (e.g., carotid sinus) or circulating humoral factors.
Autoregulating tissues include (tissues least affected by nervous reflexes):
• Cerebral circulation
• Coronary circulation
• Skeletal muscle vasculature during exercise
Extrinsic Regulation
These tissues are controlled by nervous and humoral factors originating outside
the organ, e.g., resting skeletal muscle. Extrinsic mechanisms were covered earlier
in the book.
The figure below illustrates an arteriole in skeletal muscle and the factors regulat
ing flow under resting conditions.
110
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 110 15/10/22 2:20PM
CHAPTER 4 | REGULATION OF BLOOD FLOW
(+)
NE α (sympathetic adrenergic)
(–) β2 (+) Angiotensin II + Constricts NOTE
– Dilates
Use caution with drugs such as dobutamine,
which can increase contractility through β1
No significant effects of parasympathetics receptors but can also cause hypotension
with some β2 activation.
Figure V 2 4. RestingFigure SkIeVlet4al4. RestiMnguscleSkeletalBloodMuscleFlowBlood Flow
The key points for extrinsic regulation are as follows:
• Norepinephrine (NE) released from sympathetic nerves has a tonic
influence on arteriolar tone (α receptors) in resting skeletal muscle and
skin vasculature in a thermo neutral environment.
• In times of stress, sympathetic activation can evoke substantial vasocon
striction in the aforementioned tissues, but can also greatly affect renal
and splanchnic circulations.
• Epinephrine can evoke vasodilation by binding to vascular β2 receptors.
• With the exception of the penis, the parasympathetic nervous system does
not affect arteriolar tone.
Control of Resting versus Exercising Muscle
Resting muscle
Flow is controlled mainly by increasing or decreasing sympathetic α adrenergic activity.
Exercising muscle
The elevated metabolism in exercising skeletal muscle demands an increase in
blood flow (see application of the Fick principle above). In addition, the increased
tissue O2 consumption results in a fall in the PvO2 of blood leaving the working
muscle. The primary mechanisms for increasing flow are:
• Production of vasodilator metabolites, e.g., adenosine, CO2, H+, and K+
causes marked vasodilation. In addition, these metabolites diminish NE’s
ability to vasoconstrict the arterioles. Further, the increased endothelial
shear stress of the high flow liberates NO.
• Muscle pump
BLOOD FLOW TO THE VARIOUS ORGANS
Coronary Circulation
Coronary flow patterns
Characteristics of left coronary flow (flow to the left ventricular myocardium) are
as follows.
111
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 111 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Left ventricular contraction causes severe mechanical compression of subendocar
dial vessels. Therefore:
• Very little if any blood flow occurs during systole.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences • Most of the blood flow is during diastole.
• Some subepicardial flow occurs during systole.
Characteristics of right coronary blood flow (flow to the right ventricular myocar
Microbiology dium) are as follows.
Right ventricular contraction causes modest mechanical compression of intramyo
cardial vessels. Therefore:
• Significant flow can occur during systole.
• The greatest flow under normal conditions is still during diastole.
Oxygenation
In the coronary circulation, the tissues extract almost all the oxygen they can from
the blood, even under “basal” conditions. Therefore:
• The venous PO2 is extremely low. It is the lowest venous PO2 in a resting
individual.
• Because the extraction of oxygen is almost maximal under resting
conditions, increased oxygen delivery to the tissue can be accomplished
only by increasing blood flow (Fick principle).
• In the coronary circulation, flow must match metabolism.
• Coronary blood flow is most closely related to cardiac tissue oxygen
consumption and demand.
Pumping action
Coronary blood flow (mL/min) is determined by the pumping action, or stroke
work times heart rate, of the heart. Increased pumping action means increased
metabolism, which increases the production of vasodilatory metabolites. In turn,
coronary flow increases.
Increased pump function occurs with the following:
• An increase in any of the parameters that determine CO: HR,
contractility, afterload, preload
• HR, contractility, and afterload (often called pressure work) are more
metabolically costly than the work associated with preload (volume work).
• Thus, conditions in which HR, contractility, and/or afterload increase, e.g.,
hypertension, aortic stenosis, and exercise require a greater increase in
flow compared to conditions that only increase volume work (supine,
aortic regurgitation, volume loading).
112
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 112 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 4 | REGULATION OF BLOOD FLOW
Cerebral Circulation
Flow is proportional to arterial PCO2. Under normal conditions, arterial PCO2 is
an important factor regulating cerebral blood flow.
• Hypoventilation increases arterial PCO2, thus it increases cerebral blood
flow.
• Hyperventilation decreases arterial PCO2, thus it decreases cerebral blood
flow.
As long as arterial PO2 is normal or above normal, cerebral blood flow is regulated
via arterial PCO2. Therefore:
• If a normal person switches from breathing room air to 100% oxygen,
there is no significant change in cerebral blood flow.
• However, a (large) decrease in arterial PO2 increases cerebral blood flow;
an example is high altitude cerebral edema (HACE). Under these condi
tions, it is the low arterial PO2 that is determining flow.
• Baroreceptor reflexes do not affect flow.
Intracranial pressure is an important pathophysiologic factor that can affect
cerebral blood flow.
Cutaneous Circulation
Sympathetic adrenergic nerves play an important role in the regulation of the
cutaneous circulation.
• Large venous plexus innervated by sympathetics
• A V shunts innervated by sympathetics
• Sympathetic stimulation to the skin causes:
– Constriction of arterioles and a decrease in blood flow, which is one
reason why physicians use a central line to administer vasopressors to
prevent distal necrosis
– Constriction of the venous plexus and a decrease in blood volume in
the skin
• Sympathetic activity to the skin varies mainly with the body’s need for BRIDGE TO ANATOMY
heat exchange with the environment
The splanchnic circulation is composed of
Increased skin temperature directly causes vasodilation, which increases heat loss. the gastric small intestinal, colonic,
pancreatic, hepatic, and splenic circulations,
arranged in parallel with one another. The
Temperature regulation
three major arteries that supply the
There are temperature sensitive neurons in the anterior hypothalamus, whose splanchnic organs are the celiac, superior,
firing rate reflects the temperature of the regional blood supply.
and inferior mesenteric arteries.
• Normal set point: oral 37°C (rectal + 0.5°C)
• Circadian rhythm: low point, morning; high point, evening
The body does not lose the ability to regulate body temperature during a fever. It
simply regulates body temperature at a higher set point.
113
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 113 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Vasoconstriction Vasodilation
39°C
(shivering) (sweating)
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences Core temp.
37°C
Microbiology
Set point Set point
raised lowered
Figure FiVgure2 5.IVT4em5p.eraTtuemreperature RReegguulalatitoionn
When a fever develops, body temperature rises toward the new higher set point.
Under these conditions, heat conserving and heat generating mechanisms
include:
• Shivering
• Cutaneous vasoconstriction
After a fever “breaks,” the set point has returned to normal, and body temperature
is decreasing. Heat dissipating mechanisms include:
• Sweating (sympathetic cholinergics)
• Cutaneous vasodilation
Renal and Splanchnic Circulation
A small change in blood pressure invokes an autoregulatory response to maintain
renal and splanchnic blood flows. Thus, under normal conditions, the renal and
splanchnic circulations demonstrate autoregulation.
• Situations in which there is a large increase in sympathetic activity (e.g.,
hypotension) usually cause vasoconstriction and a decrease in blood flow.
• Renal circulation is greatly overperfused in terms of nutrient require
ments, thus the venous PO2 is high.
• About 25% of the CO goes to the splanchnic circulation, thus it represents
an important reservoir of blood in times of stress.
• Splanchnic blood flow increases dramatically when digesting a meal.
Pulmonary Circuit
Characteristics
• Low pressure circuit, arterial = 15 mm Hg, venous = 5 mm Hg; small
pressure drop indicates a low resistance
• High flow, receives entire CO
• Very compliant circuit; both arteries and veins are compliant vessels
114
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 114 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 4 | REGULATION OF BLOOD FLOW
• Hypoxic vasoconstriction (low alveolar PO2 causes local arteriolar
vasoconstriction)
• Blood volume proportional to blood flow: due to the very compliant
nature of the pulmonary circuit, large changes in output of the right
ventricle are associated with only small changes in pulmonary pressures
Pulmonary response to exercise
• A large increase in cardiac output means increased volume pumped into
the circuit. This increases pulmonary intravascular pressures.
• Because of the compliant nature of the circuit, the pulmonary arterial
system distends.
• In addition, there is recruitment of previously unperfused capillaries.
Because of this recruitment and distension, the overall response is a large
decrease in pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR).
• Consequently, when CO is high, e.g., during exercise, there is only a slight
increase in pulmonary pressures.
– Without this recruitment and distension, increasing CO would result in
a very high pulmonary artery pressure.
Pulmonary response to hemorrhage
• A large decrease in CO reduces intravascular pulmonary pressures.
• Because these vessels have some elasticity, pulmonary vessels recoil. In
addition, there is derecruitment of pulmonary capillaries, both of which
contribute to a rise in PVR.
• Consequently, during hemorrhage, there is often only a slight decrease in
pulmonary artery pressure.
• Vessel recoil also means less blood is stored in this circuit.
FETAL CIRCULATION
The general features of the fetal circulatory system are shown below. The bolded
numbers refer to the percent hemoglobin (%HbO2) saturation.
• Of the fetal CO, 55% goes to the placenta.
• The umbilical vein and ductus venosus have highest %HbO2 saturation
(80%).
• When mixed with inferior vena caval blood (26% HbO2), the %HbO2
saturation of blood entering the right atrium is 67%.
• This blood is directed through the foramen ovale to the left atrium, left
ventricle, and ascending aorta to perfuse the head and the forelimbs.
• Superior vena caval blood (40% HbO2) is directed through the tricuspid
valve into the right ventricle and pulmonary artery and shunted by the
ductus arteriosus to the descending aorta. Shunting occurs because fetal
pulmonary vascular resistance is very high, so 90% of the right ventricular
output flows into the ductus arteriosus and only 10% to the lungs.
• The percent HbO2 saturation of aortic blood is 60%.
115
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 115 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
• Fifty five percent of the fetal CO goes through the placenta. At birth, the
loss of the placental circulation increases systemic resistance. The subse
quent rise in aortic blood pressure (as well as the fall in pulmonary arterial
pressure caused by the expansion of the lungs) causes a reversal of flow in
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences the ductus arteriosus, which leads to a large enough increase in left atrial
pressure to close the foramen ovale.
65%
Microbiology
Ductus
arteriosus
40% Left atrium
50%
Superior
vena cava Pulmonary
artery
Foramen ovale
Left ventricle
Right atrium
Aorta
Right ventricle
67%
60%
Inferior
vena cava 26% Ductus venosus
Portal vein
26%
Liver
Umbilical vein (highest O2)
80%
From
placenta
To
placenta
Right and left umbilical arteries
Figure FiguVre2 I6V. 4Fe6ta.l FetaClircuCliartcourlyatory SSyysstetemm
Recall Question
Which of the following regulates cerebral blood flow in a patient
suffering from high altitude cerebral edema?
A. Arterial PO2
B. Arterial PCO2
C. Arterial HCO2
D. Arterial H+
E. Cerebral PO2
Answer: A
116
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 116 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 4 | REGULATION OF BLOOD FLOW
CARDIOVASCULAR STRESS: EXERCISE
The following assumes the person is in a steady state, performing moderate
exercise at sea level.
Pulmonary Circuit
• Blood flow (CO): large increase
• Pulmonary arterial pressure: slight increase
• Pulmonary vascular resistance: large decrease
• Pulmonary blood volume: increase
• Number of perfused capillaries: increase
• Capillary surface area: increase, i.e., increased rate of gas exchange
Systemic Circuit
Arterial system
• PO2: no significant change, hemoglobin still fully saturated
• PCO2: until one approaches maximal O2 consumption, there is no
significant change; thus the increase in ventilation is proportional to the
increase in metabolism
• pH: no change or a decrease due mainly to the production of lactic acid
• Mean arterial pressure: slight increase
• Body temperature: slight increase
• Vascular resistance (TPR): large decrease, dilation of skeletal muscle beds
Venous system
• PO2: decrease
• PCO2: increase
Regional Circulations
Exercising skeletal muscle
• Vascular resistance decreases.
• Blood flow increases.
• Capillary pressure increases.
• Capillary filtration increases.
• Lymph flow increases.
• As predicted by the Fick principle, oxygen extraction increases and venous
PO2 falls.
117
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 117 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Cutaneous blood flow
Initial decrease, then an increase to dissipate heat
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Coronary blood flow
Increase due to increased work of the heart
Microbiology
Cerebral blood flow
No significant change (arterial CO2 remains unchanged)
Renal and GI blood flow
Both decrease
Physical conditioning
•
• Regular exercise increases maximal oxygen consumption (V O2max) by:
– Increasing the ability to deliver oxygen to the active muscles. It does
this by increasing the CO.
– The resting conditioned heart has a lower heart rate but greater stroke
volume (SV) than does the resting unconditioned heart.
– At any level of exercise, stroke volume is elevated.
– However, the maximal heart rate remains similar to that of untrained
individuals.
• Regular exercise also increases the ability of muscles to utilize oxygen.
There are:
– An increased number of arterioles, which decreases resistance during
exercise.
– An increased capillary density, which increases the surface area and
decreases diffusion distance.
– An increased number of oxidative enzymes in the mitochondria.
118
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 118 15/10/22 2:20P
Cardiac Cycle and Valvular
5#
Heart Disease
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Interpret scenarios on normal cardiac cycle
❏ Interpret scenarios on pressure volume loops
❏ Interpret scenarios on valvular dysfunction
NORMAL CARDIAC CYCLE
The figure below illustrates the most important features of the cardiac cycle.
1 2 3 4
100 Aortic
Aortic
valve pressure
opens
80
Hg
Aortic valve
(mm
60 closes
Pressure
40 Mitral
valve Left atrial
20 closes pressure
v Mitral valve
a c opens
0
Left
150 ventricular
pressure
Ventricular
(ml) volume
Volume
100
50 S4 S1 S2 S3 S4
Heart sounds
P R T Electrocardiogram
Q S
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
Time (sec)
FFigiguurere IVV5I1.1 C1a.rdiaCcardiaCcycle Cycle
119
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 119 15/10/22 2:20PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Note the most important aspects:
• → QRS → contraction of ventricle → rise in ventricular pressure above atrial
pressure → closure of mitral valve
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences • It is always a pressure difference that causes the valves to open or close.
• Closure of the mitral valve terminates the ventricular filling phase and
begins isovolumetric contraction.
• Isovolumetric contraction: no change in ventricular volume, and both
Microbiology
valves (mitral, aortic) closed; ventricular pressure increases and volume is
equivalent to end diastolic volume
• Opening of the aortic valve terminates isovolumetric contraction and
begins the ejection phase. The aortic valve opens because pressure in the
ventricle slightly exceeds aortic pressure.
• Ejection phase: ventricular volume decreases, but most rapidly in early stages;
ventricular and aortic pressures increase initially but decrease later in phase
• Closure of the aortic valve terminates the ejection phase and begins
isovolumetric relaxation. The aortic valve closes because pressure in the
ventricle goes below aortic pressure. Closure of the aortic valve creates the
dicrotic notch.
• Isovolumetric relaxation: no change in ventricular volume and both valves
(mitral, aortic) closed; ventricular pressure decreases and volume is
equivalent to end systolic volume
• Opening of the mitral valve terminates isovolumetric relaxation and
begins the filling phase. The mitral valve opens because pressure in the
ventricle goes below atrial pressure.
• Filling phase: the final relaxation of the ventricle occurs after the mitral
valve opens and produces a rapid early filling of the ventricle; this rapid
inflow will in some cases induce the third heart sound.
– The final increase in ventricular volume is due to atrial contraction,
which is responsible for the fourth heart sound.
• In a young, healthy individual, atrial contraction doesn’t provide significant
filling of the ventricle. However, the contribution of atrial contraction
becomes more important when ventricular compliance is reduced.
Heart Sounds
The systolic sounds are due to the sudden closure of the heart valves. Normally the
valves on the left side of the heart close first. Valves on the right side open first.
Systolic sounds
S1: produced by the closure of the mitral and tricuspid valves
• Valves close with only a separation of about 0.01 seconds, which the
human ear can appreciate only as a single sound
S2: produced by the closure of the aortic (A2 component) and pulmonic valves (P2
component)
• Heard as a single sound during expiration, but during inspiration the
increased output of the right heart causes a physiological splitting
120
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 120 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 5 | CARDIAC CYCLE AND VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
The figure below illustrates several situations where splitting of the second heart
sound may become audible.
Expiration
Pulmonic stenosis
A widening S1 A2P2
Right bundle branch block
of the split CLINICAL CORRELATE
Inspiration
Site of auscultation points:
• Aortic: Second intercostal space on
the right side, about mid clavicular
Expiration line
Fixed • Pulmonic: Second intercostal space on
S1 A2P2 Atrial septal defect
splitting
L R Shunt the left side, about mid clavicular line
Inspiration
• Tricuspid: Fifth intercostal space, just
at the left sternal border
• Mitral: Sixth intercostal space on the
Expiration left side, about mid clavicular line
Left bundle branch block
Paradoxical
S1 P2A2 Advanced aortic stenosis
splitting
Inspiration
Figure FVigIure1 2I.VA5bn2o.rmAablnormal SpSlpitltiitntigng ofofthetheSecoSnedcondHeart HSeaorutnd (SS2o)und (S2)
S3: when it is present, occurs just after the opening of the AV valves during the
rapid filling of the ventricle
• Tends to be produced by rapid expansion of a very compliant ventricle
• In children and young adults, is a normal finding
• In older adults, occurs with volume overload and is often a sign of cardiac
disease
S4: coincident with atrial contraction and is produced when the atrium contracts
against a stiff ventricle
• Examples include concentric hypertrophy, aortic stenosis, and myocardial
infarction
121
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 121 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Venous Pulse
The jugular pulse is generated by changes on the right side of the heart. The
pressures will generally vary with the respiratory cycle and are typically read at the
end of expiration when intrapleural pressure is at its closest point to zero.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
A normal jugular venous pulse tracing can be seen below.
Microbiology
a
c
x
v
y
Venous
pulse
R
P T ECG P
Q
S
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
Time (sec)
Figure VI 1 3. Venous Pulse and the ECG
Figure IV5 3. Venous Pulse and the ECG
a wave
• Highest deflection of the venous pulse and produced by the contraction of
the right atrium
• Correlates with the PR interval
• Is prominent in a stiff ventricle, pulmonic stenosis, and insufficiency
• Is absent in atrial fibrillation
c wave
• Mainly due to the bulging of the tricuspid valve into the atrium (rise in
right atrial pressure)
• Occurs near the beginning of ventricular contraction (is coincident with
right ventricular isovolumic contraction)
• Is often not seen during the recording of the venous pulse
122
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 122 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 5 | CARDIAC CYCLE AND VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
x descent
• Produced by a decreasing atrial pressure during atrial relaxation
• Separated into two segments when the c wave is recorded
• Alterations occur with atrial fibrillation and tricuspid insufficiency
v wave
• Produced by the filling of the atrium during ventricular systole when the
tricuspid valve is closed
• Corresponds to T wave of the EKG
• A prominent v wave would occur in tricuspid insufficiency and right heart
failure
y descent
• Produced by the rapid emptying of the right atrium immediately after the
opening of the tricuspid valve
• A more prominent wave in tricuspid insufficiency and a blunted wave in
tricuspid stenosis.
Some abnormal venous pulses are shown below.
a
c
x v
y
Normal
c v y
a
x A Fib
v
a y
Tricuspid
regurgitation
a
c
v
x y
Tricuspid
stenosis
Figure IV 5 4. Normal Versus Abnormal Jugular Pulses
Figure VI 1 4. Normal Versus Abnormal Jugular Pulses
Similar recordings to the systemic venous pulse are obtained when recording
pulmonary capillary wedge pressure. Left atrium mechanical events are transmit
ted in a retrograde manner, although they are somewhat damped and delayed.
123
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 123 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
The figure below shows the pressure recording from the tip of a Swan Ganz
catheter inserted through a systemic vein through the right side of the heart into
the pulmonary circulation and finally with the tip wedged in a small pulmonary
artery. The pressure recorded at the tip of the catheter is referred to as pulmonary
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences capillary wedge pressure and is close to left atrial pressure and is an index of
preload on the left ventricle.
R. vent pressure = 25/2
Microbiology
Pulmonary arterial pressure = 25/8
A: passage across tricuspid valve
Pressure
B: passage across pulmonic valve
C: pulmonary capillary wedge pressure
A
C
B
Time
Figure VI 1 5. Swan Ganz Catheterization
Figure IV 5 5. Swan Ganz Catheterization
PRESSURE VOLUME LOOPS
The major features of a left ventricular pressure–volume loop can be seen below.
Most of the energy consumption occurs during isovolumetric contraction. Most of
the work is performed during the ejection phase.
180
Aortic valve Ejection
Hg
closes Aortic valve opens
(mm 120
End systolic
Pressure volume Isovolumetric contraction
Stroke
60 Isovolumetric Mitral valve closes
volume
relaxation
Mitral valve
15 Filling End diastolic volume
opens
0
50 100 150
Volume (ml)
Figure FiVguIre1 6IV. 5Le6ft. LeVftentVriecnutlraicrular PPrreessssuurree––VVoolluummee Loop Loop
124
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 124 15/10/22 2:20PM
CHAPTER 5 | CARDIAC CYCLE AND VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
Mechanically Altered States
• Aortic insufficiency: cardiac volumes (EDV and ESV) are increased so
entire loop shifts right; however, in contrast to heart failure, SV and peak
systolic pressure go up
• Heart failure (decreased contractility): increased ventricular volumes
(EDV and ESV; in short, loop shifts right); SV and peak systolic pressure
fall
• Essential hypertension (aortic stenosis): elevated afterload; over time, the
concentric hypertrophy causes diastolic dysfunction (decreased ventricular
compliance), thus EDP increases
• Increased contractility: increased SV and peak systolic pressure; if this is
only variable that changes, loop will ultimately move left
• Exercise: increased preload, peak systolic pressure, and SV; ESV falls
Recall Question
Which of the following is seen in a pressure volume loop in patients
with aortic stenosis?
A. Increased preload, stroke volume, and ventricular systolic
pressure
B. Decreased ventricular systolic pressure, increased preload,
shifts to the right
C. Increased ventricular systolic pressure with little change in
preload in the early stages
D. Increased ventricular systolic pressure, decreased preload,
increased ejection fraction, loop shifts to the left
E. Increased ventricular systolic pressure, ejection fraction, and
preload
Answer: C
125
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 125 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
VALVULAR DYSFUNCTION
Stenosis of valves usually consists of chronic problems that develop slowly
over time. Valvular insufficiency problems can be acute or chronic, the conse
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences quences of which can be quite different.
NOTE Aortic Stenosis
With valvular problems, note the following: Aortic stenosis is a pathologic thickening and fusion of the valve leaflets that
Microbiology
decrease the open valve area, creating a major resistance point in series with the
• Astenotic valve is a resistor and
systemic circuit. There is a large loss in pressure moving the blood through the
creates a murmur when the valve is narrow opening.
open.
• Ventricular systolic pressure increases (increased afterload) to overcome
• Aregurgitant valve allows backflow of the increased resistance of the aortic valve.
blood and creates a murmur when the
• Pressure overload of the left ventricle leads to a compensatory concentric
valve is normally closed.
hypertrophy (new sarcomeres laid down in parallel so that the myofibril
thickens), which leads to decreased ventricular compliance (diastolic
• Pressure and volume “behind” the
dysfunction) and coronary perfusion problems and eventually systolic
defective valve increase. Behind refers
dysfunction.
to the direction of blood flow, e.g., left
• Prominent “a” wave of the left atrium as the stiffer left ventricle becomes
ventricle is behind the aortic valve; left
more dependent on atrial contraction for filling
atrium is behind the mitral valve, etc.
• Mean aortic pressure is maintained in the normal range in the early stages
of the disorder. Arterial pressure rises slowly and the pulse pressure is
reduced.
• There is a pressure gradient between the left ventricle and aorta during
ejection.
• Systolic murmur begins after S1 (midsystolic) that is crescendo decre
scendo in intensity.
• Slow closure of the aortic valve can cause a paradoxical splitting of the
second heart sound (aortic valve closes after the pulmonic).
160
Hg)
Control
(mm
Aortic
Pressure90 pressure
pressur
LV
Atrial
pressure
0 Ventricular
pressure LV volume
S SM S2
1
Figure VI 1 7. Aortic Stenosis
Figure IV5 7. Aortic Stenosis
126
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 126 15/10/22 2:20PM
CHAPTER 5 | CARDIAC CYCLE AND VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
Aortic Insufficiency Regurgitation
The aortic valve does not close properly at the beginning of diastole. As a result,
during diastole there is retrograde flow from the aorta into the ventricle.
• Acute insufficiency does not allow development of compensatory mecha
nisms, which can lead to pulmonary edema and circulatory collapse.
• Very large left ventricles are seen in aortic insufficiency. There is a large
increase in LVEDV (increase preload) but close to normal end diastolic
pressures (eccentric hypertrophy). All cardiac volumes are increased (EDV,
ESV, SV).
• Ventricular failure raises pulmonary pressures and causes dyspnea.
• Increased preload causes increased stroke volume, which results in
increased ventricular and aortic systolic pressures.
• Retrograde flow from the aorta to the left ventricle produces a low aortic
diastolic pressure (the volume of blood left in the aorta at the end of
diastole is rapidly reduced).
• There is no true isovolumetric relaxation and a reduced period of isovolu
metric contraction.
• Aortic insufficiency is characterized by a large aortic pulse pressure and a
low aortic diastolic pressure (hence the bounding pulse).
• Dilation of the ventricle produces a compensatory eccentric hypertrophy.
160
Hg) Control
(mm
Pressure pressur
Aortic
pressure
40 LV
Atrial
pressure
0
Ventricular
pressure LV volume
S1 S2 S1
Figure IV 5 8. Aortic Insufficiency (Regurgitation)/(Diastolic Rumble ≈Austin Flint Murmur)
Figure VI 1 8. Aortic Insufficiency (Regurgitation) /(Diastolic Rumble Austin Flint Murmur)
127
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 127 15/10/22 2:20PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
CLINICAL CORRELATE Mitral Stenosis
The S2 to opening snap (OS) interval is A narrow mitral valve impairs emptying of the left atrium (LA) into the left
inversely related to left atrial pressure. A ventricle (LV) during diastole. This creates a pressure gradient between the atrium
and ventricle during filling.
Pathologsyhort S2:OS interval isBaeharveliioarbaSlleciencei/nSdoiccaiatSolcriences
of severe mitral stenosis. • Pressure and volume can be dramatically elevated in the left atrium; there
is dilation of the left atrium over time, which is accelerated with atrial
fibrillation.
Microbiology • Thrombi appear in the enlarged left atrium.
• Left atrial pressures are elevated throughout the cardiac cycle. Increased
left atrial pressures transmitted to the pulmonary circulation and the right
heart.
• Little change or a decrease in the size of the left ventricle. Systolic function
normal.
• Diastolic murmur begins after S2 and is associated with altered atrial
emptying; a late diastolic murmur and an exaggerated “a” wave are
associated with atrial contraction.
100 Aortic
pressure
Hg)
(mm Control
Pressure pressur
Atrial
pressure
LV
20
Ventricular
0 pressure
LV volume
S2 S1
Figure FigVurIe 1IV9.5 M9.itrMalitral SStetneonosissis
128
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 128 15/10/22 2:20PM
CHAPTER 5 | CARDIAC CYCLE AND VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
Mitral Insufficiency Regurgitation
Acute mitral insufficiency can cause a sudden dramatic rise in pulmonary pres
sures and pulmonary edema. It can result from structural abnormalities in the
valve itself, papillary muscles, chordae tendinae, or a structural change in the
mitral annulus.
• No true isovolumetric contraction. Regurgitation of blood from the left
ventricle to the left atrium throughout ventricular systole.
• Atrial volumes and pressures increased but chronic dilation of the atrium
prevents a dramatic rise in atrial pressures.
• Ventricular volumes and pressures are increased during diastole. Most
patients develop chronic compensated left ventricular dilation and
hypertrophy, then at some point the left ventricle cannot keep up with the
demand and decompensated heart failure develops.
• Increased preload but with reduced afterload.
• Systolic murmur that begins at S1 (pansystolic).
120
Aortic
Hg) pressure
(mm 80
Control
Pressure
pressur
Atrial LV
pressure
Ventricular
0
pressure
LV volume
S1 S2
Figure VFIigur1e 10.IV5Mi1tr0a.l MitrIanlsuffIincsieunffciyciency (R(eRgeugrugrigtaittiaotino)n)
129
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 129 15/10/22 2:20PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART IV | CARDIOVASCULAR
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Recall Question
Which of the following heart murmurs will be heard in apatient with
aortic stenosis?
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
A. Decrescendo diastolic murmur
B. Low pitched diastolic rumble with an opening snap
Microbiology C. Holosystolic murmur
D. Crescendo decrescendo systolic murmur
E. Midsystolic murmur
Answer: D
130
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 130 15/10/22 2:20P
PART V
RESPIRATION
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 131 15/10/22 2:20P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 132 15/10/22 2:20P
1#
Lung Mechanics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Answer questions about overview of the respiratory system
❏ Interpret scenarios on lung volumes and capacities
❏ Solve problems concerning ventilation
❏ Use knowledge of lung mechanics
❏ Answer questions about cardiovascular changes with ventilation
❏ Solve problems concerning positive pressure ventilation
❏ Answer questions about pneumothorax
❏ Use knowledge of lung compliance
❏ Interpret scenarios on airway resistance
❏ Explain information related to pulmonary function testing
THE RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
The purpose of understanding lung mechanics is to view them in the big clinical
picture of pulmonary function test (PFT) interpretation. The PFT is the key
diagnostic test for the pulmonologist, just as the EKG is to the cardiologist.
PFTs consist of 3 individual tests (see Respiratory section for more detail):
• Measurements of static lung compartments (i.e., lung volumes)
• Airflow used to evaluate airway resistance using a spirometer
• Alveolar membrane permeability using carbon monoxide as a marker of
diffusion
LUNG VOLUMES AND CAPACITIES
The figure below graphically shows the relationships among the various lung
volumes and capacities. Clinical measurements of specific volumes and capacities
provide insights into lung function and the origin of disease processes.
The values for the volumes and capacities given below are typical for a 70 kg male.
133
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 133 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Tidal volume (VT): amount of air that
enters or leaves the lungs in a single
respiratory cycle (500 mL) IC IRV
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences VC*
Functional residual capacity (FRC):
Lung
amount of gas in the lungs at the end of VT* TLC* * Indicates those
Volume
a passive expiration; the neutral or measurements that
equilibrium point for the respiratory ERV are highest yield
Microbiology
system (2,700 mL) ; it is a marker for FRC*
lung compliance RV*
Inspiratory capacity (IC): maximal
Time
volume of gas that can be inspired from
FRC (4,000 mL)
Figure VII 1 1.FiguLrueng VV1olu1m.eLsung Voalunmdes CapaancditiesCapacities
Inspiratory reserve volume (IRV):
additional amount of air that can be A spirometer can measure only changes in lung volume. As such, it cannot
inhaled after a normal inspiration measure residual volume (RV) or any capacity containing RV. Thus, TLC and FRC
cannot be measured using simple spirometry; an indirect method must be
(3,500 mL)
used. Common indirect methods are helium dilution, nitrogen washout, and
Expiratory reserve volume (ERV): plethysmography.
additional volume that can be expired
after a passive expiration (1,500 mL)
VENTILATION
Residual volume (RV): amount of air in
the lungs after a maximal expiration
(1,200 mL) Total Ventilation
Total ventilation is also referred to as minute volume or minute ventilation. It is
Vital capacity (VC): maximal volume
the total volume of air moved in or out (usually the volume expired) of the lungs
that can be expired after a maximal
per minute.
inspiration (5,500 mL)
• V•E: total ventilation
VE= VT × f
Total lung capacity (TLC): amount of air
VT: tidal volume
in the lungs after a maximal inspiration Normal resting values would be:
(6,700 mL) f: respiratory rate
VT = 500 mL
f= 15
500 mL × 15/min = 7,500 mL/min
Dead Space
Regions of the respiratory system that contain air but are not exchanging O2 and
CO2 with blood are considered dead space.
Anatomic dead space
Airway regions that, because of inherent structure, are not capable of O2 and CO2
exchange with the blood. Anatomic dead space (anatVD) includes the conducting
zone, which ends at the level of the terminal bronchioles. Significant gas exchange
(O2 uptake and CO2 removal) with the blood occurs only in the alveoli.
The size of the anatVD in mL is approximately equal to a person’s weight in
pounds. Thus a 150 lb individual has an anatomic dead space of 150 mL.
134
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 134 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 1 | LUNG MECHANICS
Composition of the anatomic dead space and the respiratory zone NOTE
The respiratory zone is a very constant environment. Under resting conditions, What is the function of functional residual
rhythmic ventilation introduces a small volume into a much larger respiratory capacity (FRC)?
zone. Thus, the partial pressure of gases in the alveolar compartment changes very
Answer: Breathing is cyclic, while blood flow
little during normal rhythmic ventilation.
through the pulmonary capillary bed is
continuous. During the respiratory cycle,
Composition at the End of Expiration (Before Inspiration)
there are short periods of apneas at the end
• At the end of an expiration, the anatVD is filled with air that originated in of inspiration and expiration when there is
the alveoli or respiratory zone.
no ventilation but there is continuous blood
• Thus, the composition of the air in the entire respiratory system is the flow. Without the FRC acting as a buffer for
same at this static point in the respiratory cycle.
continued gas exchange during apneic
• This also means that a sample of expired gas taken near the end of periods, these conditions would in effect
expiration (end tidal air) is representative of the respiratory zone. create an intrapulmonary shunt, inducing
deoxygenated blood from the pulmonary
capillaries to empty into the pulmonary
Dead Same composition as respiratory veins.
space zone (contains CO2)
Respiratory
zone
PO2 =100
PCO2 =40
PN2 =573
PH2O =47
Figure VII 1 2F.igurEend V1of2.EExnpdiratioofnExpiration
Composition at the End of Inspiration (Before Expiration)
• The first 150 mL of air to reach the alveoli comes from the anatVD.
• It is air that remained in the dead space at the end of the previous expira
tion and has the same composition as alveolar gas.
• After the first 150 mL enters the alveoli, room air is added to the respira
tory zone.
• At the end of inspiration the anatVD is filled with room air.
• The presence of the anatVD implies the following: in order to get fresh air
into the alveoli, one must always take a tidal volume larger than the
volume of the anatVD.
135
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 135 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Humidified room air O2, N2, H2O
Dead (no CO2)
space
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Respiratory
zone
PO2 =100
Microbiology PCO2 =40
PN2 =573
PH2O =47
Figure VII 1 3. End Vof1 I3n.spEirnadtionoFfiguInrespiration
Alveolar dead space
Alveolar dead space (alvVD) refers to alveoli containing air but without blood flow
in the surrounding capillaries. An example is a pulmonary embolus.
Physiologic dead space
Physiologic dead space (physioIVD) refers to the total dead space in the lung
system (anatVD + alvVD). When the physiol VD is greater than the anatVD, it
implies the presence of alvVD, i.e., somewhere in the lung, alveoli are being
ventilated but not perfused.
Total ventilation
V = VT (f)
= 500 (15)
= 7,500 mL/min
•
Minute ventilation (V ) is the total volume of air entering the lungs per minute.
Alveolar Ventilation
•
Alveolar ventilation VArepresents the room air delivered to the respiratory zone
per breath.
• The first 150 mL of each inspiration comes from the anatomic dead space
and does not contribute to alveolar ventilation.
• However, every additional mL beyond 150 does contribute to alveolar
VA•:alveolar ventilation ventilation.
•
VT: tidal volume VA = (VT − VD) f
= (500 mL − 150 mL) 15 = 5250 mL/min
VD: dead space
f: respiratory rate The alveolar ventilation per inspiration is 350 mL. This equation implies that the
volume of fresh air that enters the respiratory zone per minute depends on the
pattern of breathing (how large a VT and the rate of breathing).
136
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 136 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 1 | LUNG MECHANICS
Increases in the Depth of Breathing
There are equal increases in total and alveolar ventilation per breath, since dead
space volume is constant.
If the depth of breathing increases from a depth of 500 mL to a depth of 700 mL,
the increase in total and alveolar ventilation is 200 mL per breath.
Increases in the Rate of Breathing
There is a greater increase in total ventilation per minute than in alveolar ventila
tion per minute, because the increased rate causes increased ventilation of dead
space and alveoli.
For every additional inspiration with a tidal volume of 500 mL, total ventilation
increases 500 mL but alveolar ventilation only increases by 350 mL (assuming
dead space is 150 mL).
For example, given the following, which person has the greater alveolar ventilation?
Tidal Volume Rate Total Ventilation
Person A 600 mL 10/min 6,000 mL/min
Person B 300 mL 20/min 6,000 mL/min
Answer: Person A. Person B has rapid, shallow breathing. This person has a large
component of dead space ventilation (first 150 mL of each inspiration). Even
though total ventilation may be normal, alveolar ventilation is decreased. There
fore, the individual is hypoventilating.
In rapid, shallow breathing, total ventilation may be above normal, but alveolar
ventilation may be below normal.
LUNG MECHANICS
Muscles of Respiration
Inspiration
The major muscle of inspiration is the diaphragm. Contraction of the diaphragm
enlarges the vertical dimensions of the chest. Also utilized are the external
intercostal muscles of the chest wall. Contraction of these muscles causes the ribs
to rise and thus increases the anterior posterior dimensions of the chest.
Expiration
Under resting conditions, expiration is normally a passive process, i.e., it is due to the
relaxation of the muscles of inspiration and the elastic recoil of the lungs. For aforced
expiration, the muscles of the abdominal wall and the internal intercostals contract.
This compresses the chest wall down and forces the diaphragm up into the chest.
Included would be external oblique, rectus abdominal, internal oblique, and
transverse abdominal muscles.
137
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 137 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Forces Acting on the Lung System
In respiratory physiology, units of pressure are usually given as cm H2O.
1 cm H2O = 0.74 mm Hg (1 mm Hg = 1.36 cm H2O)
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Lung recoil and intrapleural pressure
Understanding lung mechanics involves understanding the main forces acting on
Microbiology the respiratory system.
Lung recoil represents the inward force created by the elastic recoil properties of
alveoli.
• As the lung expands, recoil increases; as the lung gets smaller, recoil
decreases.
• Recoil, as a force, always acts to collapse the lung.
Chest wall recoil represents the outward force of the chest wall.
• FRC represents the point where this outward recoil of the chest wall is
counterbalanced by the inward recoil of the lung.
Intrapleural pressure (IPP) represents the pressure inside the thin film of fluid
between the visceral pleura, which is attached to the lung, and the parietal pleura,
which is attached to the chest wall.
• The outward recoil of the chest and inward recoil of the lung create a
negative (subatmospheric) IPP.
• IPP is the outside pressure for all structures inside the chest wall.
Transmural pressure gradient (PTM) represents the pressure gradient across any
tube or sphere.
• Calculated as inside pressure minus outside pressure
• If positive (inside greater than outside), it is a net force pushing out against
the walls of the structure
• If negative (outside greater than inside), it is a net force pushing in against
the walls of the structure; depending upon the structural components, the
tube/sphere can collapse if PTM is negative or zero
• At FRC, IPP is negative, and thus PTM is positive. This positive outward
force prevents alveolar collapse (atelectasis).
• For the entire lung, PTM is called the transpulmonary pressure (TPP).
Before Inspiration
The glottis is open, and all respiratory muscles are relaxed (FRC). This is the
neutral or equilibrium point of the respiratory system. Intrapleural pressure is
negative at FRC because the inward elastic recoil of the lungs is opposed by the
outward directed recoil of the chest wall.
Because no air is flowing through the open glottis, alveolar pressure must be zero.
By convention, the atmospheric pressure is set to equal zero.
138
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 138 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 1 | LUNG MECHANICS
Patm = 0
Intrapleural pressure: –5 cm H2O
PTM: 5
Alveolar pressure: O
Recoil –5
PA = 0
Figure FVigIIure1 V4.1 L4.unLgung FFoorrccee RelaRtieolnatsihoinpsships at FRC at FRC
During Inspiration
Inspiration is induced by the contraction of the diaphragm and external intercostal
muscles that expand the chest wall. The net result is to make intrapleural pressure
more negative.
• The more negative IPP causes PTM (TPP) to increase, which in turn causes
expansion of the lungs. The greater the contraction, the greater the change
in intrapleural pressure and the larger the PTM (TPP) expanding the lung.
• The expansion of the lung increases alveolar volume. Based upon Boyle’s
law, the rise in volume causes pressure to decrease, resulting in a negative
(subatmospheric) alveolar pressure.
• Because alveolar pressure is now less than atmospheric, air rushes into the
lungs.
End of Inspiration
The lung expands until alveolar pressure equilibrates with atmospheric pressure.
The lungs are at their new, larger volume. Under resting conditions, about 500 mL
of air flows into the lung system in order to return alveolar pressure back to zero.
139
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 139 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Patm = 0 Patm = 0
Intrapleural Intrapleural
pressure < –5 cm H2O pressure = –8 cm H2O
Microbiology PTM> 5 PTM= 8
Alveolar Alveolar
Recoil <–5 pressure = –1 cm H2O Recoil –8 pressure = 0
PA = –1 PA = 0
Figure VII 1 F5ig.ureLungV1 5F.orLceusng ForcdeusringDuringInspIinrasptiiornation Figure VII 1 6F.iguLreungV 1F6o.rceLsung FoartcesEndat Enodf oInfspInirsaptiiorantion
Expiration
Expiration under resting conditions is produced simply by the relaxation of the
muscles of inspiration.
Patm = 0
• Relaxation of the muscles of inspiration causes intrapleural pressure to
return to −5 cm H2O
• This increases IPP back to its original level of −5 cm H2O, resulting in a
–5
decreased PTM. The drop in PTM reduces alveolar volume, which increases
–8 alveolar pressure (Boyle’s law).
PA = +1 • The elevated alveolar pressure causes air to flow out of the lungs. The out
flowing air returns alveolar pressure toward zero, and when it reaches
zero, airflow stops. The lung system returns to FRC.
Expiration
The intrapleural pressure during a normal respiratory cycle is illustrated below.
Under resting conditions, it is always a subatmospheric pressure.
The intraalveolar pressure during a normal respiratory cycle is also illustrated
below. It is slightly negative during inspiration and slightly positive during
expiration.
• No matter how large a breath is taken, intraalveolar pressure always
returns to 0 at the end of inspiration and expiration.
• By convention, total atmospheric pressure = 0.
140
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 140 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 1 | LUNG MECHANICS
Inspiration Expiration
0.5
0.4
0.3
VT
0.2
0.1
Change in lung volume (liters)
0
–5 FRC
Intrapleural pressure
(cm H2O)
–6
–7
–8
+0.5
Flow (liters/sec)
0
–0.5
+1
Alveolar pressure
(cm H2O)
0
–1
Figure VII 1 7. Essentials of Pulmonary Events during a Breath
Figure V 1 7. Essentials of Pulmonary Events during a Breath
Recall Question
The following lung volumes are noted on spirometer of a 38 year old
man with asthma: FRC 3.0 L,VC 6.0 L, and ERV 1.5 L.What is this
patient’s IC?
A. 9.0 L
B. 7.5 L
C. 4.5 L
D. 3.0 L
E. Value cannot be determined
Answer: C
141
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 141 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
CARDIOVASCULAR CHANGES WITH VENTILATION
Inspiration
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
With inspiration, intrapleural pressure becomes more negative (decreases).
This increases the PTM across the vasculature, causing the great veins and right
atrium to expand. This expansion decreases intravascular pressure, thereby
increasing the pressure gradient driving VR to the right heart.
Microbiology
• Systemic venous return and right ventricular output are increased.
• An increase in the output of the right ventricle delays closing of the
pulmonic valves and typically results in a splitting of the second heart
sound.
• Pulmonary vessels expand, and the volume of blood in the pulmonary
circuit increases. In addition, because pulmonary vascular resistance
(PVR) is lowest at FRC, it increases.
• In turn, venous return to the left heart, and the output of the left ventricle
is decreased, causing decreased systemic arterial pressure (drop in systolic
most prominent).
• This inspiration reduces vagal outflow to the heart (mechanism debatable),
resulting in a slight rise in heart rate (respiratory sinus arrhythmia). This
is why patients are asked to hold their breath, if clinically possible, when
an EKG is taken.
Expiration
Expiration is the reverse of the processes above. Intrapleural pressure becomes
more positive (increases), i.e., returns to original negative value. PTM returns to
its original level, thereby decreasing the pressure gradient for VR.
• Systemic venous return and output of the right ventricle are decreased.
• Pulmonary vessels are compressed, and the volume of blood in the
pulmonary circuit decreases.
• The return of blood and output of the left ventricle increases, causing
systemic arterial pressure to rise (primarily systolic).
• Vagal outflow increases (mechanism debated), reducing HR (respiratory
sinus arrhythmia).
• A Valsalva maneuver is a forced expiration against a closed glottis. This
forced expiration creates a positive IPP (see later in this chapter), which
compresses the great veins in the chest. This in turn reduces VR.
POSITIVE PRESSURE VENTILATION
Assisted Control Mode Ventilation (ACMV)
In ACMV, the inspiratory cycle is initiated by patient or automatically if no signal
is detected within a specified time window. Expiration is not assisted. Expiration is
accomplished in the normal manner (passive recoil of the lungs).
142
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 142 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 1 | LUNG MECHANICS
Positive End Expiratory Pressure (PEEP)
In PEEP, positive pressure is applied at the end of the expiratory cycle to decrease
alveolar collapse. It is useful in treating the hypoxemia of acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS) (see Hypoxemia section.)
• Small alveoli have a strong tendency to collapse, creating regions of
atelectasis.
• The larger alveoli are also better ventilated, and supplementary oxygen is
more effective at maintaining a normal arterial PO2.
• One downside to positive pressure ventilation and accentuated by PEEP is
a decrease in venous return and cardiac output.
PEEP
PA
+5
ACMV
0
Assist Control
Figure FigureVIIV11 88aa.. PoPsiotisviteive PressurePressuVreentilation Ventilation
Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP)
In CPAP, continuous positive pressure is applied to the airways. It is useful in treat
ing obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) since the lung and upper airways (nasophar
ynx) remain at a larger volume throughout the respiratory cycle.
CPAP is administered by mask (patient not intubated). The patient breathes
spontaneously.
Inspiration Expiration
PA
+5
0
FiguFriegure VVI1I 8b1. C8bP.AP CPAP
143
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 143 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
PNEUMOTHORAX
The following changes occur with the development of a simple pneumothorax. The
pneumothorax may be traumatic (perforation of chest wall) or spontaneous (rup
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences ture of an alveolus):
• Intrapleural pressure increases from a mean at –5 cm H2O to equal
atmospheric pressure, thus transpulmonary pressure is zero.
• Lung recoil decreases to zero as the lung collapses.
Microbiology • Chest wall expands. At FRC, the chest wall is under a slight tension
directed outward. It is this tendency for the chest wall to spring out and the
opposed force of recoil that creates the intrapleural pressure of –5 cm H2O.
In some cases, the opening of the lung to the pleural space may function as a valve,
allowing the air to enter the pleural space but not to leave. This creates a tension
pneumothorax.
• Strong inspiratory efforts promote the entry of air into the pleural space,
but during expiration, the valve closes and positive pressures are created in
the chest cavity. Ventilation decreases but the positive pressures also
decrease venous return and cardiac output.
CLINICAL CORRELATE • Tension pneumothorax most commonly develops in patients on a positive
pressure ventilator.
Common clinical signs of a tension
• Because intrapleural pressure becomes positive, transpulmonary becomes
pneumothorax include:
negative in some parts of the lungs.
• Respiratory distress
• Asymmetry of breath sounds
LUNG COMPLIANCE
• Deviation of trachea to the side
A static isolated lung inflation curve is illustrated below.
opposite the tension pneumothorax
• Markedly depressed cardiac output
5
TLC
4 Normal
(L
Volume
3
Lung
2
= tidal volume (600 ml)
1
0
–5 –10 –20 –30 –40
–8
Intrapleural Pressure (cm H2O)
Figure FigurVeII V119.9. LLuunngg InfIlantfiloantion CurveCurve
Lung compliance is the change in lung volume (tidal volume) divided by the
change in surrounding pressure. This is stated in the following formula:
Compliance = _∆_V_
∆P
144
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 144 15/10/22 2:20PM
CHAPTER 1 | LUNG MECHANICS
Problem
Tidal volume = 0.6 liters
Intrapleural pressure before inspiration = –5 cm H2O
Intrapleural pressure after inspiration = –8 cm H2O
Lung compliance = __0_.6____l_iters = 0.200 liters/cm H 2O
3 cm H2O
The preceding calculation simply means that for every 1 cm H2O surrounding pres
sure changes, 200 mL of air flows in or out of the respiratory system. It flows into
the system if surrounding pressure becomes more negative (e.g., –5 to –6 cm H2O)
or out of the system if surrounding pressure becomes more positive (e.g., –5 to –4
cm H2O).
• Increased compliance means more air will flow for a given change in
pressure.
• Reduced compliance means less air will flow for a given change in
pressure.
• In the preceding curve, although the slope is changing during inflation, its
value at any point is the lung’s compliance. It is the relationship between
the change in lung volume (tidal volume) and the change in intrapleural or
surrounding pressure.
• The steeper the line, the more compliant the lungs. Restful breathing
works on the steepest, most compliant part of the curve.
• With a deep inspiration, the lung moves toward the flatter part of the
curve, and thus it has reduced compliance. Lung compliance is less at TLC
compared to FRC.
The figure below shows pathologic states in which lung compliance changes.
5 Emphysema, aging, normal saline in alveoli
TLC
Normal
4
(liters
3
Volume
TLC
2 Fibrosis
Lung
1
0
–10 –20 –30 –40
Intrapleural Pressure (cm H2O)
Figure FiguVreII V1 110.10. LLuunngg ComCopmliapnlciaence
145
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 145 15/10/22 2:20PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Increased lung compliance also occurs with aging and with a saline filled lung.
• Compliance is an index of the effort required to expand the lungs (to
overcome recoil). It does not relate to airway resistance.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences • Compliance decreases as the lungs are inflated because the curve is not a
straight line.
• For any given fall in intrapleural pressure, large alveoli expand less than
small alveoli.
Microbiology • Very compliant lungs (easy to inflate) have low recoil. Stiff lungs (difficult
to inflate) have a large recoil force.
Components of Lung Recoil
Lung recoil has the following components:
• The tissue itself; more specifically, the collagen and elastin fibers of the
lung
– The larger the lung, the greater the stretch of the tissue and the greater
the recoil force.
• The surface tension forces in the fluid lining the alveoli. Surface tension
forces are created whenever there is a liquid–air interface.
– Surface tension forces tend to reduce the area of the surface and
generate a pressure. In the alveoli, they act to collapse the alveoli;
therefore, these forces contribute to lung recoil.
• Surface tension forces are the greatest component of lung recoil. The
relationship between the surface tension and the pressure inside a bubble
is given by the Law of LaPlace.
Pressure μ t_e_n_s_io_n__
radius
P
Figure FigurVeII V111111.. SSuurfrafaccee TensioTnension
If wall tension is the same in 2 bubbles, the smaller bubble will have the greater
pressure.
Although the situation is more complex in the lung, it follows that small alveoli
tend to be unstable. They have a great tendency to empty into larger alveoli
and collapse (creating regions of atelectasis). Collapsed alveoli are difficult to
reinflate.
146
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 146 15/10/22 2:20P
CHAPTER 1 | LUNG MECHANICS
Psmall > Plarge
Figure VII 1 12. Atelectasis
Figure V1 12. Atelectasis
If the alveoli were lined with a simple electrolyte solution, lung recoil would be so
great that lungs theoretically should not be able to inflate. This is prevented by a
chemical (produced by alveolar type II cells), surfactant, in the fluid lining a
normal lung.
Surfactant has 2 main functions:
• It lowers surface tension forces in the alveoli; in other words, it lowers lung
recoil and increases compliance.
• It lowers surface tension forces more in small alveoli than in large alveoli.
This promotes stability among alveoli of different sizes by decreasing the
tendency of small alveoli to collapse (decreases the tendency to develop
atelectasis).
Respiratory Distress Syndrome (RDS)
Infant RDS (hyaline membrane disease) is a deficiency of surfactant.
Adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is an acute lung injury via the fol
lowing:
• Bloodstream (sepsis): develops from injury to the pulmonary capil
lary endothelium, leading to interstitial edema and increased lymph
flow
– Leads to injury and increased permeability of the alveolar epithelium
and alveolar edema
– The protein seepage into the alveoli reduces the effectiveness of
surfactant.
– Neutrophils have been implicated in the progressive lung injury from
sepsis.
• Airway (gastric aspirations): direct acute injury to the lung epithelium
increases permeability of the epithelium followed by edema
In the figure below, curve A represents respiratory distress syndrome. The curve is
shifted to the right, and it is a flatter curve (lung stiffer).
• A greater change in intrapleural pressure is required to inflate the lungs.
• The tendency for collapse is increased; thus PEEP is sometimes
provided.
147
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 147 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Curve B represents atelectasis.
• Once alveoli collapse, it is difficult to reinflate them.
• Note the high TPP required to open atelectatic alveoli (green line, B, in
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences figure below).
Normal
Microbiology
Volum
A
Lung
B
TPP or PTM
Figure FigVurIeI 1V113.13. DDefeifciiceinecnycy of SoufrfactSaunrtfactant
AIRWAY RESISTANCE
Radius of an Airway
In the branching airway system of the lungs, it is the first and second bronchi that
represent most of the airway resistance.
• Parasympathetic nerve stimulation produces bronchoconstriction.
• This is mediated by M3 receptors. In addition, M3 activation increases
airway secretions.
• Circulating catecholamines produce bronchodilation. Epinephrine is the
endogenous agent and it bronchodilates via b2 receptors.
Resistance = ______1_
radius4
148
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 148 15/10/22 2:20PM
CHAPTER 1 | LUNG MECHANICS
Mechanical Effect of Lung Volume
The figure below illustrates that, as lung volume increases, airway resistance
decreases.
H2O/sec
3
(cm
Resistance
2
1
Airway
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Lung Volume (liters)
FigureFigureVIIV 11141.4.AirAwiarywayResistanRceesistance
The mechanisms for this are:
• PTM: To get to high lung volumes, IPP becomes more and more negative.
This increases the PTM across small airways, causing them to expand. The
result is decreased resistance.
• Radial traction: The walls of alveoli are physically connected to small
airways. Thus, as alveoli expand, they pull open small airways. The result
is decreased resistance.
PULMONARY FUNCTION TESTING
Vital Capacity
Vital capacity (VC) is the maximum volume of air that an individual can move in a
single breath. The most useful assessment of the VC is to expire as quickly and
forcefully as possible, i.e., a “timed” or forced VC (or FVC). During the FVC
maneuver, the volume of air exhaled in the first second is called the forced
expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV1).
149
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 149 15/10/22 2:20PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
7
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
6
(liters 5
Microbiology
This figure and those that follow differ FEV1 FVC
from the output of a spirometer because Volume 4
they show actual lung volume (including
residual volume), not only changes in
3
Lung
volume.
2
1
0
FEV1
= 80% (or 0.80)
1 second
FVC
Figure VII 1 1F5ig.urePulmVon1ar1y5. PulmonaFruynctionFunctionTestTest ooff FFoorrcceedd VitalViCtaalpacityCapacity (FVC)
There are 2 key pieces of data from a PFT involving the measurement of FVC:
• FVC: this is total volume exhaled
– Because age, gender, body size, etc., can influence the absolute amount
of FVC, it is expressed as a percent of predicted (100% of predicted
being the “ideal”).
• FEV1 (forced expiratory volume in 1 second): although this volume can
provide information on its own, it is commonly compared to the FVC such
that one determines the FEV1/FVC ratio.
– This ratio creates a flow parameter; 0.8 (80%) or greater is considered
normal.
• Thus, this PFT provides a volume and a flow.
• Restrictive pulmonary disease is characterized by reduced volume (low
FVC, but normal flow), while obstructive disease is characterized by
reduced flow (low FEV1/FVC).
Physiology of a PFT
In the figure below, the picture on the left shows that at the end of an inspiratory
effort to TLC, IPP is very negative. This negative IPP exists throughout the lungs
during a passive expiration and thus the PTM is positive for both alveoli and
airways.
150
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 150 15/10/22 2:20PM
CHAPTER 1 | LUNG MECHANICS
0 cm H2O 0 cm H2 O
+20 15 +20
–20 –20
0 +40
–20 –20 +20 +20
End of Inspiration During a Forced Expiration
Figure FigurVeII V11161.6. DDyynnaammiicc AirwayAirwCaoympressioCnompression
The picture on the right shows the situation during a maximal forced expiration.
• A forced expiration compresses the chest wall down and in, creating a
positive IPP. The level of positive IPP generated is dependent upon effort.
• This forced expiration creates a very positive alveolar pressure, in turn
creating a large pressure gradient to force air out of the lungs.
• However, this positive IPP creates a negative PTM in the airways. It is more
negative in the large airways, e.g., trachea and main stem bronchi. These
regions have structural support and thus do not collapse even though PTM
is very negative.
• Moving down the airways toward alveoli, the negative PTM ultimately
compresses airways that lack sufficient structural support. This is dynamic
compression of airways.
• This compression of airways creates a tremendous resistance to airflow. In
fact, the airway may collapse, producing infinite resistance. Regardless,
this compression creates a level of resistance that overwhelms any and all
other resistors that exist in the circuit and is thus the dominant resistor for
airflow.
• Once this occurs, elastic recoil of the lung becomes the effective driving
force for airflow, and airflow becomes independent of the effort. This
means airflow is a property of the patient’s respiratory system, hence the
reason this test is very diagnostic.
• Because this resistance is created in small airways, the entire volume of the
lungs cannot be expired, creating residual volume (RV).
Because PFTs measure flow (FEV1/FVC) and volume, they accurately diagnose
obstructive (low flow) and restrictive disease (low volume, normal flow).
151
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 151 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Obstructive versus Restrictive Patterns
The following figures demonstrate a standard PFT, the measurement of FVC,
FEV1, and FEV1/FVC.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY Obstructive pulmonary disease
There are 4 basic pathologic alterations that Obstructive disease is characterized by an increase in airway resistance that is
measured as a decrease in expiratory flow. Examples are chronic bronchitis,
Microbiolocagny occur in obstructive disease:
asthma, and emphysema.
• Bronchoconstriction
Obstructive pattern
• Hypersecretion
• Total lung capacity (TLC) is normal or larger than normal, but during a
• Inflammation maximal forced expiration from TLC, a smaller than normal volume is
slowly expired.
• Destruction of lung parenchyma
• Depending upon the severity of the disease, FVC may or may not be
(emphysema)
reduced. If severe enough, then FVC is diminished.
Obstructive Normal
BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
(liters)7 (liters 7
Treatment of obstructive disease includes
FEV1
6 6
β2 agonists (short and long acting), M3
Volume FVC Volume
blockers such as ipratropium, PDE inhibitors, 5 5
FEV1 FVC
mast cell stabilizers, leukotriene receptor 4 4
blockers, and steroids. Lung Lung
3 3
2 2
1 1
0 0
1 second FVC FRC TLC RV FEV1 1 second
FEV1 FEV1
= 50% = 80% (or 0.80)
FVC FVC
Figure VII 1 17. Obstructive Pattern
Figure V1 17. Obstructive Pattern
Restrictive pulmonary disease
Restrictive pulmonary disease is characterized by an increase in elastic recoil—a
decrease in lung compliance—which is measured as a decrease in all lung volumes.
Reduced vital capacity with low lung volumes are the indicators of restrictive
pulmonary diseases. Examples are ARDS and interstitial lung diseases such as
sarcoidosis and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF).
152
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 152 15/10/22 2:20PM
CHAPTER 1 | LUNG MECHANICS
Restrictive pattern
• TLC is smaller than normal, but during a maximal forced expiration from
TLC, the smaller volume is expired quickly and more completely than in a
normal pattern.
• Therefore, even though FEV1 is also reduced, the FEV1/FVC is often increased.
• However, the critical distinction is low FVC with low FRC and RV.
Restrictive Normal
7 7
(liters) 6 (liters 6
FEV1
5 5
Volume Volume
4 4
FVC
FEV1
Lung 3 Lung 3
FVC
2 2
1 1
0 0
1 second FVC FRC TLC RV FEV1 1 second
FEV = 88%1 FEV1
= 80% (or 0.80)
FVC FVC
Figure FiVguIIre 1V118.18.ReRsetrsitcrtiicvtieve PattePrnattern
Table V 1 1. Obstructive Versus Restrictive Pattern
Obstructive Pattern Restrictive Pattern
Variable (e.g., Emphysema) (e.g., Fibrosis)
TLC ↑ ↓ ↓
FEV1 ↓ ↓ ↓
FVC ↓ ↓ ↓
FEV1/FVC ↓ ↑ or normal
Peak flow ↓ ↓
FRC ↑ ↓
RV ↑ ↓
FVC is always decreased when pulmonary function is significantly compromised.
A decreased FEV1/FVC ratio is evidence of an obstructive pattern. A normal or
increased FEV1/FVC ratio is evidence of a restrictive pattern, but a low TLC is
diagnostic of restrictive lung disease.
153
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 153 15/10/22 2:20PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Flow–Volume Loops
The instantaneous relationship between flow (liters/sec) and lung volume is useful
in determining whether obstructive or restrictive lung disease is present. In the
loop shown below, expiration starts at total lung capacity and continues to residual
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
volume. The width of the loop is the FVC.
Microbiology
Expiratio
(liters/sec)
TLC RV
0
Flow Lung volume
(liters)
Inspiration
Figure VII 1 19. Flow–Volume Loop
Figure V 1 19. Flow–Volume Loop
Loops found in obstructive and restrictive disease are shown below.
In obstructive disease, the flow–volume loop begins and ends at abnormally high
lung volumes, and the expiratory flow is lower than normal. In addition, the
downslope of expiration “scallops” or “bows” inward. This scalloping indicates
that at any given lung volume, flow is less. Thus, airway resistance is elevated
(obstructive).
154
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 154 15/10/22 2:20PM
CHAPTER 1 | LUNG MECHANICS
(liters/sec
12
Rate
9
Obstructive
Flow Normal
Restrictive
6
Expiratory
3
6 5 4 3 2 1 0
Lung Volume (liters)
Figure VII 1 20. Forced Expiratory Flow–Volume Loop
Figure V1 20. Forced Expiratory Flow–Volume Loop
In restrictive disease, the flow–volume loop begins and ends at unusually low
lung volumes. Peak flow is less, because overall volume is less. However, when
expiratory flow is compared at specific lung volumes, the flow in restrictive disease
is somewhat greater than normal.
Recall Question
Which of the following lung diseases decreases total lung capacity
on a pulmonary function test?
A. Emphysema
B. Chronic bronchitis
C. Interstitial pulmonary fibrosis
D. Aging
E. Normal saline in alveoli
Answer: C
155
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 155 15/10/22 2:20PM
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 156 15/10/22 2:20P
2#
Alveolar–Blood Gas Exchange
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Answer questions about the normal lung
❏ Solve problems concerning factors affecting alveolar PCO2
❏ Use knowledge of factors affecting alveolar PO2
❏ Interpret scenarios on alveolar blood gas transfer: Fick law of diffusion
❏ Use knowledge of diffusing capacity of the lung
THE NORMAL LUNG
Partial Pressure of a Gas in Ambient Air Patm: atmospheric pressure
Pgas = Fgas × Patm Pgas: partial pressure of a gas
By convention, the partial pressure of the gas is expressed in terms of its dry gas Fgas: concentration of a gas
concentration. For example, the PO2 in ambient air is:
PO2 = 0.21 × 760 = 160 mm Hg
Partial Pressure of a Gas in Inspired Air
Inspired air is defined as air that has been inhaled, warmed to 37°C, and completely
humidified, but has not yet engaged in gas exchange. It is the fresh air in the
anatVD that is about to enter the respiratory zone.
PIgas: partial pressure of inspired gas
The partial pressure of H2O is dependent only on temperature and at 37°C is
47 mm Hg. Humidifying the air reduces the partial pressure of the other gases PH2O: partial pressure of H2O vapor
present.
PIgas = Fgas (Patm − PH2O) NOTE
Dalton’s law of partial pressures states that
For example, the PO2 of inspired air is:
the total pressure exerted by a mixture of
PIO2 = 0.21 (760 − 47) = 150 mm Hg
gases is the sum of the pressures exerted
The figure below shows the pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the alveolar, independently by each gas in the mixture.
pulmonary end capillary, and systemic arterial blood.
Also, the pressure exerted by each gas (its
partial pressure) is directly proportional to
its percentage in the total gas mixture.
157
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 157 15/10/22 2:20P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
160 mm Hg Ambient PO2 = F(Patm)
150 PIO2 = F(Patm – 47)
mm Hg I= Inspired
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences Alveolar •
ventilation (VA)
Microbiology PAO2 = 100 mm Hg
PACO2 = 40 mm Hg
A= alveolar
a = systemic arterial
End capillary
Systemic
PvO2 = 40 mm Hg PO2 = 100 mm Hg Arterial
PaO2 = 95 mm Hg
PvcO2 = 47 mm Hg PCO2 = 40 mm Hg PaCO2 = 40 mm Hg
•
Pulmonary capillary blood flow (Qc)
Figure V2 1. PuFlmigounreary CVapIiIllary2 1G.asPesulmonary Capillary Gases
• Under normal conditions, the PO2 and PCO2 in the alveolar compartment
and pulmonary end capillary blood are the same (perfusion limited).
• There is a slight change (PO2↓) between the end capillary compartment
and systemic arterial blood because of anatomical shunts and blood flow
from alveoli with low ventilation/perfusion ratios.
• Alveolar–systemic arterial PO2 differences = A - a O2 gradient
• This difference (5–15 mm Hg) often provides information about the cause
of a hypoxemia. The A - a O2 gradient increases with age, and clinically
(age + 4)
one can estimate the gradient using the formula _______
4
FACTORS AFFECTING ALVEOLAR PCO2
Only 2 factors affect alveolar PCO2: metabolic rate and alveolar ventilation.
metabolic CO2 production
_______________________
PACO μ
alveolar ventilation
At rest, unless there is fever or hypothermia, CO2 production is relatively constant;
so you can use changes of PACO2 to evaluate alveolar ventilation.
Alveolar Ventilation
There is an inverse relationship between PACO2 and alveolar ventilation. This is
the main factor affecting alveolar PCO2. Therefore, if ventilation increases, PACO2
decreases; if ventilation decreases, PACO2 increases.
158
02_USMLE_Preclinical_PartV_Ch02.indd 158 26/09/22 1:01P
CHAPTER 2 | ALVEOLAR–BLOOd GAS ExCHANGE
Hyperventilation NOTE
During hyperventilation, there is an inappropriately elevated level of alveolar Respiratory quotient (RQ) is the ratio
ventilation, and PACO2 is depressed. between CO2 production and O2
• consumption at the cellular
If VA is doubled, then PACO2 is decreased by half.
level. Respiratory exchange ratio (RER) is
For example, PACO2 = 40 mm Hg the ratio of CO2 output and oxygen uptake
•
2 × VA; PACO2 = 20 mm Hg occurring in the lung.
In a steady state, RQ and RER are equal.
Hypoventilation
During hypoventilation, there is an inappropriately depressed level of alveolar
ventilation, and PACO2 is elevated.
•
If VA is halved, then PACO2 is doubled.
For example, PACO2 = 40 mm Hg
•
1/2 VA; PACO2 = 80 mm Hg
Metabolic Rate
There is a direct relationship between alveolar PCO2 and body metabolism. For
PaCO2 to remain constant, changes in body metabolism must be matched with
equivalent changes in alveolar ventilation.
•
• If VA matches metabolism, then PACO2 remains constant.
•
• For example, during exercise, if body metabolism doubles, then VA must
double if PaCO2 is to remain constant.
• If body temperature decreases and there is no change in ventilation,
PaCO2 decreases, and the individual can be considered to be
hyperventilating.
FACTORS AFFECTING ALVEOLAR PO2
Alveolar Air Equation
The alveolar air equation includes all the factors that can affect alveolar PO2.
P_A__C_O__2_
PAO = (Patm - 47)FiO 2 -
RQ
Practical application of the equation includes differential diagnosis of hypoxemia
by evaluating the alveolar arterial (A–a) gradient of oxygen.
There are 3 factors that can affect PAO2:
Patm = atmospheric pressure, at sea level 760 mm Hg
An increase in atmospheric pressure (hyperbaric chamber) increases alveolar PO2,
and a decrease (high altitude) decreases alveolar PO2.
FiO2 = fractional concentration of oxygen, room air 0.21
159
02_USMLE_Preclinical_PartV_Ch02.indd 159 26/09/22 1:01P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
An increase in inspired oxygen concentration increases alveolar PO2.
PaCO2 = alveolar pressure of carbon dioxide, normally 40 mm Hg
An increase in alveolar PCO2 decreases alveolar PO2, and a decrease in alveolar
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences PCO2 increases alveolar PO2. For most purposes, you can use arterial carbon
dioxide (PaCO2) in the calculation.
The fourth variable is RQ.
CO2 produced mL/min
Microbiology RQ = respiratory exchange ratio = ___________________ ;normally 0.8
O2 consumed mL/min
For example, a person breathing room air at sea level would have
PAO2 = (760 - 47) 0.21 - 40/0.8 = 100 mm Hg.
Effect of PACO2 on PAO2
PIO2 = P inspired O2, i.e., the PO2 in the conducting airways during inspiration.
Because PaCO2 affects alveolar PO2, hyperventilation and hypoventilation also
affect PaO2.
Hyperventilation (e.g., PaCO2 = 20 mm Hg)
PaO2 = PiO2 - PaCO2 (assume R = 1)
normal = 150 - 40 = 110 mm Hg
hyperventilation = 150 - 20 = 130 mm Hg
Hypoventilation (e.g., PaCO2 = 80 mm Hg)
normal = 150 - 40 = 110 mm Hg
hypoventilation = 150 - 80 = 70 mm Hg
ALVEOLAR–BLOOd GAS TRANSFER: FICK
LAW OF dIFFUSION
Simple diffusion is the process of gas exchange between the alveolar compartment
and pulmonary capillary blood. Thus, those factors that affect the rate of diffusion
also affect the rate of exchange of O2 and CO2 across alveolar membranes. (An
additional point to remember is that each gas diffuses independently.)
•
Vgas = A__ × D × (P1 - P2)
V•gas = rate of gas diffusion T
Structural Features That Affect the Rate of diffusion
There are 2 structural factors and 2 gas factors that affect the rate of diffusion.
A = surface area for exchange, ↓ in emphysema, ↑ in exercise
T = thickness of the membranes between alveolar gas and capillary blood, ↑ in
fibrosis and many other restrictive diseases, as well as pulmonary edema
A structural problem in the lungs is any situation in which there is a loss of surface
area and/or an increase in the thickness of the membrane system between the
alveolar air and the pulmonary capillary blood. In all cases, the rate of oxygen and
carbon dioxide diffusion decreases. The greater the structural problem, the greater
the effect on diffusion rate.
160
02_USMLE_Preclinical_PartV_Ch02.indd 160 26/09/22 1:01P
CHAPTER 2 | ALVEOLAR–BLOOd GAS ExCHANGE
Factors Specific to Each Gas Present
d (diffusion constant) = main factor is solubility
The only clinically significant feature of D is solubility. The more soluble the gas,
the faster it diffuses across the membranes. CO2 is the most soluble gas with which
we will be dealing. The great solubility of CO2 is the main reason why it diffuses
faster across the alveolar membranes than O2.
Gradient across the membrane
(P1 - P2): This is the gas partial pressure difference across the alveolar membrane.
The greater the partial pressure difference, the greater the rate of diffusion.
Under resting conditions, when blood first enters the pulmonary capillary, the
gradient for O2 is:
100 - 40 = 60 mm Hg
An increase in the PO2 gradient across the lung membranes helps compensate for
a structural problem. If supplemental O2 is administered, alveolar PO2 increases
and the gradient is elevated. However, supplemental O2 does not improve the
ability of the lungs to remove CO2 from blood. This increased gradient helps
return the rate of O2 diffusion toward normal. The greater the structural problem,
the greater the gradient necessary for a normal rate of O2 diffusion.
The gradient for CO2 is 47 - 40 = 7 mm Hg.
Even though the gradient for CO2 is less than for O2, CO2 still diffuses faster
because of its greater solubility.
Recall Question
Which of the following factors increases alveolar PCO2, assuming no
compensation?
A. Decrease in atmospheric pressure (Patm)
B. Increase in fractional concentration of oxygen (FiO2)
C. Decrease in compliance of alveoli
D. Increase in thickness of the membranes between alveolar gas
and capillary blood
E. Increase in body temperature
Answer: E
dIFFUSING CAPACITY OF THE LUNG
There are 2 terms that describe the dynamics of the transfer of individual sub
stances between the alveoli and the capillary:
• If the substance equilibrates between the capillary and alveoli, it is said to
be in a perfusion limited situation.
• If the substance does not equilibrate between the capillary and alveoli, it
is said to be in a diffusion limited situation.
161
02_USMLE_Preclinical_PartV_Ch02.indd 161 26/09/22 1:01P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Carbon monoxide is a unique gas in that it typically doesn’t equilibrate between
the alveolar air and the capillary blood. Thus, it is a diffusion limited gas. This is
taken advantage of clinically, and the measurement of the uptake of CO in mL/
min/mm Hg is referred to as the diffusing capacity of the lung (DLCO).
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
DLCO is an index of the lung’s structural features.
Carbon Monoxide: A Gas That Is Always diffusion Limited
Microbiology
Carbon monoxide has an extremely high affinity for hemoglobin. When it is
present in the blood, it rapidly combines with hemoglobin, and the amount
dissolved in the plasma is close to zero (therefore, partial pressure in the plasma is
considered zero). Thus, the alveolar partial pressure gradient (P1 – P2) is simply P1
(alveolar partial pressure), since P2 is considered to be zero.
At a constant and known alveolar partial pressure, the uptake of carbon monoxide
depends only on the structural features of the lung.
•
V gas = _A_ × D × (P 1 - P2)
T
•
VCO = A__ × D × PA CO
T
PCO = 0
PCO = 1 mm Hg
• A
VCO ⬀
T
Figure FiguVreII V2 22.2. CCaarrbboonn MonMoxoindoexide
This measured uptake of carbon monoxide is called the diffusing capacity of the
lung (DL; mL/min/mm Hg). It is an index of overall surface area and membrane
thickness.
• With a structural problem, it correlates with the extent of lung damage
and is particularly useful when measured serially over time.
• DL (rate of CO diffusion) decreases in emphysema and fibrosis but
increases during exercise.
162
02_USMLE_Preclinical_PartV_Ch02.indd 162 26/09/22 1:01P
Transport of O2 and CO2 and
3#
the Regulation of Ventilation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Interpret scenarios on transport of oxygen
❏ Answer questions about transport of carbon dioxide
❏ Interpret scenarios on neural regulation of alveolar ventilation
❏ Answer questions about respiratory stress: unusual environments
TRANSPORT OF OXYGEN
Units of Oxygen Content
Oxygen content = concentration of oxygen in the blood, e.g., arterial blood
= 20 volumes %
= 20 volumes of oxygen per 100 volumes of blood
= 20 mL of oxygen per 100 mL of blood
= 0.2 mL of oxygen per mL of blood
Dissolved Oxygen
Oxygen dissolves in blood and this dissolved oxygen exerts a pressure. Thus, PO2
of the blood represents the pressure exerted by the dissolved gas, and this PO2 is
directly related to the amount dissolved.
The amount dissolved (PO2) is the primary determinant for the amount of oxygen
bound to hemoglobin (Hb).
There is a direct linear relationship between PO2 and dissolved oxygen.
• When PO2 is 100 mm Hg, 0.3 mL O2 is dissolved in each 100 mL of blood
(0.3 vol%).
• Maximal hyperventilation can increase the PO2 in blood to 130 mm Hg
(0.4 vol%).
163
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 163 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Vol
(dissolved)
0.3
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
0.2
Content
0.1
Microbiology
O2
20 40 60 80 100
PO2 in Blood (mm Hg)
Figure V3 1. Dissolved Oxygen in Plasma
Figure VII 3 1. Dissolved Oxygen in Plasma
Oxyhemoglobin
Each Hb molecule can attach and carry up to four oxygen molecules. Binding sites
on Hb have different affinities for oxygen. Also, the affinity of a site can and does
change as oxygen is loaded or unloaded from the Hb molecule and as the chemical
composition of the plasma changes.
Site 4 – O2 systemic arterial blood = 97% saturated
attached when the minimal
PO2 ≅ 100 mm Hg
Site 3 – O2 systemic venous blood = 75% saturated
attached when the minimal (resting state)
PO2 ≅ 40 mm Hg
Site 2 – O2 P50 for arterial blood. P50 is the PO2
attached when the minimal required for 50% saturation
PO2 ≅ 26 mm Hg
Site 1 – O2 usually remains attached Under physiologic conditions, only sites
under physiologic conditions. 2, 3, and 4 need to be considered.
Most of the oxygen in systemic arterial blood is oxygen attached to Hb. The only
significant form in which oxygen is delivered to systemic capillaries is oxygen
bound to Hb.
Hemoglobin O2 Content
The number of mL of oxygen carried in each 100 mL of blood in combination with
Hb depends on the Hb concentration [Hb]. Each gram of Hb can combine with
1.34 mL of O2.
If the [Hb] is 15 g/100 mL (15 g%), then the maximal amount of O2 per 100 mL
(100% saturation) in combination with Hb is:
1.34([Hb]) = 1.34(15) = 20 mL O2/100 mL blood = 20 vol%
This volume represents the “carrying capacity” of the blood.
164
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 164 15/10/22 2:21PM
CHAPTER 3 | TRANSPORT OF O2 AND CO2 AND THE REGULATION OF VENTILATION
The Hb in systemic arterial blood is about 97% saturated with oxygen, which
means slightly less than 20 vol% is carried by Hb.
When blood passes through a systemic capillary, it is the dissolved oxygen that
diffuses to the tissues. However, if dissolved oxygen decreases, PO2 also decreases,
and there is less force to keep oxygen attached to Hb. Oxygen comes off Hb and
dissolves in the plasma to maintain the flow of oxygen to the tissues.
Hyperventilation or supplementing the inspired air with additional oxygen in a
normal individual can significantly increase the PaO2 but has little effect on total
oxygen content. For example:
Dissolved O2 HbO2 Total O2 Content
If PaO2 = 100 mm Hg 0.3 ≅ 19.4 ≅ 19.7 vol%
If PaO2 = 130 mm Hg 0.4 ≅ 19.4 ≅ 19.8 vol%
(hyperventilation)
Oxygen–Hb Dissociation Curves
The figure below represents 3 major points on the oxygen–hemoglobin dissocia
tion curve. The numbered sites refer to the hemoglobin site numbers discussed
just previously.
20 100
4
%) Saturatio
80
(vol
15
3
Content
Hemoglob6i0n
10
2
HbO2 40
5 %
20
0 0
0
PO2 in Blood (mm Hg)
Figure V3 2. Oxygen–Hb Dissociation Curves
Figure VII 3 2. Oxygen–Hb Dissociation Curves
The following factors shift the curve to the right:
• Increased CO2 (Bohr effect)
• Increased hydrogen ion (decrease pH)
• Increased temperature
• Increased 2,3 bisphosphoglycerate (2,3 BPG)
In each case, the result can be explained as a reduced affinity of the Hb molecule
for oxygen. However, carrying capacity is not changed, and systemic arterial blood
at a PO2 of 100 mm Hg is still close to 100% saturation.
165
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 165 15/10/22 2:21PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
The opposite chemical changes shift the curve to the left.
20
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences Temperature
% PCO2
(vol
15
2,3 BPG
Content
Microbiology H+
10
Note that only points on the steep part Temperature
HbO2
of the curve are affected.
PCO2
5
2,3 BPG
H+
0
0 20 40 60 80 100
PO2 in Blood (mm Hg)
Figure V3 3. Shifts in Hb–O2 Dissociation Curve
Figure VII 3 3. Shifts in Hb O2 Dissociation Curve
Shift to the Right Shift to the Left
Easier for tissues to extract More difficult for tissues to extract
oxygen oxygen
Steep part of curve, O2 content Steep part of curve, O2 content
decreased increased
P50 increased P50 decreased
Stored blood loses 2,3 bisphosphoglycerate, causing a left shift in the curve, while
hypoxia stimulates the production of 2,3 bisphosphoglycerate, thereby causing a
right shift.
Hb Concentration Effects
Anemia is characterized by a reduced concentration of Hb in the blood.
Polycythemia is characterized by a higher than normal concentration of Hb in the
blood.
P50: In simple anemia and polycythemia, the P50 does not change without tissue
hypoxia; e.g., PO2 of 26 mm Hg produces 50% saturation of arterial hemoglobin.
The figure below illustrates the effects of an increase and a decrease in hemoglobin
concentration. The main change is the plateau or carrying capacity of the blood.
Note that the point halfway up each curve, the P50, is still close to 26 mm Hg.
166
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 166 15/10/22 2:21PM
CHAPTER 3 | TRANSPORT OF O2 AND CO2 AND THE REGULATION OF VENTILATION
Polycythemia
24 Arterial 100% Normal Hb=15
Anemia
content increase sat.
20
%
(vol Arterial 100%
16
content decrease sat.
Content
12
NOTE
100%
HbO2 38°C
8 sat. The changes indicated by anemia refer to an
pH = 7.40
acute, not particularly severe (Hb > 10 g/dL)
4 development of anemia. However, chronic
P50 anemia will increase the P50 (right shift
0 the curve), particularly ifit is severe (Hb
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 < 10 g/dL). The underlying mechanism is
not well understood, but may result from
PO2 (mm Hg)
increased 2,3 BPG.
Figure VII 3 4. Effect of Hemoglobin Content on O2 Content
Figure V3 4. Effect of Hemoglobin Content on O2 Content
Effects of Carbon Monoxide
Carbon monoxide (CO) has a greater affinity for Hb than does oxygen (240×
greater). The figure below shows that with CO, the O2–Hb dissociation curve is
shifted to the left (CO increases the affinity of Hb for O2) and HbO2 content is
reduced.
%)
(vol CO
Normal
Content
HbO2
PO2 in Blood (mm Hg)
Figure VII 3 5. FCigaurbreon V 3 M5.onCoaxribdoen MonoPxoidiseoningPoisoning
167
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 167 15/10/22 2:21PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
The effects of anemia, polycythemia, and carbon monoxide poisoning are summa
rized below.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences Table V 3 1. Systemic Arterial Blood
PO2 Hb Concentration O2 per g Hb O2 Content
Anemia Normal ↓ Normal ↓
Microbiology
Polycythemia Normal ↑ Normal ↑
CO poisoning Normal Normal ↓ ↓
(acute)
O2 per g Hb = % saturation
In anemia, hemoglobin is saturated but arterial oxygen content is depressed
because of the reduced concentration of hemoglobin.
In polycythemia, arterial oxygen content is above normal because of an increased
hemoglobin concentration.
In CO poisoning, arterial PO2 is normal, but oxygen saturation of hemoglobin is
depressed.
TRANSPORT OF CARBON DIOXIDE
Dissolved Carbon Dioxide
Carbon dioxide is 24× more soluble in blood than oxygen is. Even though the
blood has a PCO2 of only 40–47 mm Hg, about 5% of the total CO2 is carried in
the dissolved form.
Carbamino Compounds
Carbon dioxide reacts with terminal amine groups of proteins to form carbamino
compounds. The protein involved appears to be almost exclusively hemoglobin.
About 5% of the total CO2 is carried as carbamino compounds. The attachment
sites that bind CO2 are different from the sites that bind O2.
Bicarbonate
About 90% of the CO2 is carried as plasma bicarbonate. In order to convert CO2
into bicarbonate or the reverse, carbonic anhydrase (CA) must be present.
CA
CO2 + H2O ↔ H2CO3 ↔ H+ + HCO3−
The steps in the conversion of CO2 into bicarbonate in a systemic capillary are
seen below.
168
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 168 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 3 | TRANSPORT OF O2 AND CO2 AND THE REGULATION OF VENTILATION
CO2
Plasma
CO2 Cl––HCO3
–
CO2 + H2O H2CO3 H+ + HCO3
Carbonic
anhydrase
Hb – H
Hb – CO2
Red blood cell
Figure V 3 6. Formation of Bicarbonate Ion
Figure VII 3 6. Formation of Bicarbonate Ion
Plasma contains no carbonic anhydrase; therefore, there can be no significant
conversion of CO2 to HCO3 − in this compartment.
Because deoxygenated Hb is a better buffer, removing oxygen from hemoglobin
shifts the reaction to the right and thus facilitates the formation of bicarbonate in
the red blood cells (Haldane effect).
To maintain electrical neutrality as HCO3 − moves into the plasma, Cl− moves into
the red blood cell (chloride shift).
In summary:
• Bicarbonate is formed in the red blood cell but it is carried in the plasma
compartment.
• The PCO2 determines the volume of CO2 carried in each of the forms
listed above. The relationship between the PCO2 and the total CO2 content
is direct and nearly linear.
• Thus, hyperventilation not only lowers the PCO2 (mm Hg), it also lowers
the CO2 content (vol%).
54
%
(vol
52
Content
50
CO2
48
46
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
PCO2 in Blood (mm Hg)
Figure VII 3 7. CO2 Content in Blood
Figure V3 7. CO2 Content in Blood
169
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 169 15/10/22 2:21PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
NEURAL REGULATION OF ALVEOLAR VENTILATION
The level of alveolar ventilation is driven mainly from the input of specific chemo
receptors to the central nervous system. The stronger the stimulation of these
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences receptors, the greater the level of alveolar ventilation. Chemoreceptors monitor the
chemical composition of body fluids. In this system, there are receptors that
respond to pH, PCO2, and PO2.
There are 2 groups of receptors, and they are classified by their location.
Microbiology
Central Chemoreceptors
Central receptors are located in the central nervous system—more specifically,
close to the surface of the medulla. Stimulation of central chemoreceptors increas
es ventilation.
• The receptors directly monitor and are stimulated by cerebrospinal fluid
[H+] and CO2. The stimulatory effect of increased CO2 may be due to the
local production of H+ from CO2.
• Because the blood–brain barrier is freely permeable to CO2, the activity of
these receptors changes with increased or decreased systemic arterial
PCO2.
• H+ does not easily penetrate the blood brain barrier. Thus, an acute rise
in arterial H+, not of CO2 origin, does not stimulate central chemorecep
tors.
• These receptors are very sensitive and represent the main drive for
ventilation under normal resting conditions at sea level.
• Therefore, the main drive for ventilation is CO2 (H+) on the central
chemoreceptors.
The relationship between the central chemoreceptors and systemic arterial blood
can be seen below.
CO2 CO2
–
H+ –
–
Medulla
–
H+
Systemic
arterial blood CSF
Figure VII 3 8. Central Chemoreceptors
Figure V3 8. Central Chemoreceptors
170
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 170 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 3 | TRANSPORT OF O2 AND CO2 AND THE REGULATION OF VENTILATION
The system does adapt, usually within 12–24 hours. The mechanism of adaptation
may be the normalization of CSF H+ by the pumping of HCO3 – into or out of the
CSF. There are no central PO2 receptors.
Peripheral Chemoreceptors
Peripheral receptors are found within small bodies at 2 locations:
• Carotid bodies: near carotid sinus, afferents to CNS in glossopharyngeal
nerve IX
• Aortic bodies: near aortic arch, afferents to CNS in vagus nerve X
The peripheral chemoreceptors are bathed in arterial blood, which they monitor
directly. These bodies have 2 different receptors:
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY/
• H+/CO2 receptors
PHARMACOLOGY
– These receptors are less sensitive than the central chemoreceptors, but
they still contribute to the normal drive for ventilation. The normal CO2 drive to breathe is
– Therefore, under normal resting conditions at sea level, for all practical suppressed in COPD patients, and by
narcotics and general anesthetics.
purposes, the total drive for ventilation is CO2, mainly via the central
chemoreceptors but with a small contribution via the peripheral
chemoreceptors.
• PO2 receptors
CLINICAL CORRELATE
– The factor monitored by these receptors is PO2, not oxygen content.
Although oxygen content is reduced in
– Because they respond to PO2, they are actually monitoring dissolved
oxygen and not oxygen on Hb. anemia, the PaO2 is normal; thus, anemia
does not directly stimulate ventilation.
– When systemic arterial PO2 is close to normal (≅100 mm Hg) or above
However, the reduced oxygen delivery can
normal, there is little if any stimulation of these receptors.
cause excess lactic acid production, which
• They are strongly stimulated only by a dramatic decrease in systemic
would in turn stimulate peripheral
arterial PO2.
chemoreceptors.
• Sensitivity to hypoxia increases with CO2 retention.
These receptors do not adapt.
Central Respiratory Centers
Medullary centers
The site of the inherent rhythm for respiration ventilation is the medulla of the
brainstem.
For spontaneous breathing, an intact medulla must be connected to the diaphragm
(via the phrenic nerve). Thus a complete C1 or C2 lesion will prevent diaphrag
matic breathing but not a complete C6 or lower lesion.
The main features involved in the central control of ventilation are seen below.
171
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 171 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Medulla
Rhythm
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
C3
To
diaphragm
C5
Microbiology
Figure VII 3 9. CNSV3Re9sp.irCatNorSy RespiCraetonrteyrsFiguCreenters
Abnormal Breathing Patterns
Apneustic breathing is prolonged inspirations alternating with a short period of
expiration. This pattern is attributed to the loss of the normal balance between
vagal input and the pons medullary interactions. Lesions in these patients are
usually found in the caudal pons.
Cheyne Stokes breathing is periodic type of breathing that has cycles of gradually
increasing depth and frequency followed by a gradual decrease in depth and
frequency between periods of apnea. It may result from midbrain lesions or
congestive heart failure.
RESPIRATORY STRESS: UNUSUAL ENVIRONMENTS
High Altitude
At high altitude, atmospheric pressure is reduced from 760 mm Hg of sea level.
Because atmospheric pressure is a factor that determines room air and alveolar
PO2, those 2 values are also reduced; they are permanently depressed unless
enriched oxygen is inspired.
Therefore, PAO2 <100 mm Hg, PaO2 <100 mm Hg, and the low arterial PO2
stimulates the peripheral chemoreceptors and increases alveolar ventilation. At
high altitude, then, the main drive for ventilation changes from CO2 on the central
chemoreceptors at sea level to a low PO2 drive of the peripheral chemoreceptors,
and hyperventilation ensues.
Table V 3 2. Acute Changes and Long Term Adaptations (Acclimatization)
Acute Changes Acclimatization
PAO2 and PaO2 decreased remains decreased
PACO2 and PaCO2 decreased remains decreased
Systemic arterial pH increased decreases to normal via
renal compensation
Hb concentration no change increases (polycythemia)
Hb % sat decreased remains decreased
Systemic arterial O2 decreased increases to normal
content
172
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 172 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 3 | TRANSPORT OF O2 AND CO2 AND THE REGULATION OF VENTILATION
At high altitude, hypoxia can develop, resulting in increased circulating levels of NOTE
erythropoietin and red cell concentration of 2,3 bisphosphoglycerate (right shifts
What principle explains the physiology of
the oxygen hemoglobin dissociation curve). Erythropoietin increases red blood
why nitrogen will be forced into solution?
cell production and eventually causes an adaptive polycythemia.
Answer: Henry’s law. The amount of gas that
will dissolve in a liquid varies directly with
High Pressure Environment
the pressure above that liquid. High
In a hyperbaric environment breathing room air (21% O2 and 79% N2), the partial
pressures force gas into solution. However,
pressure of O2 and N2 increase in the alveoli and systemic arterial blood. The
solubilities and temperature also come into
pressure of nitrogen also increases in other body compartments.
play when considering Henry’s law. Even
though a huge N2 gradient may exist
Oxygen between the air and plasma, nitrogen is
• Adverse effect is oxygen toxicity due to the production of oxygen radicals. barely soluble at all.
• Clinical uses include carbon monoxide poisoning, compromised tissue
grafts, and gas gangrene.
BRIDGE TO MICROBIOLOGY
Nitrogen
Gas gangrene is caused by the bacteria
• Rapture of the deep: a feeling of euphoria associated with high nitrogen
levels Clostridium perfringens. This bacteria thrives
in an anaerobic environment, explaining why
• The bends (Caisson disease, or decompression sickness): too rapid
decompression after exposure to high nitrogen pressures. It can result in hyperbaric oxygen can be helpful.
nitrogen coming out of solution in joints (bends) or in the blood, resulting Staphylococcus aureus and Vibrio vulnificus
in air emboli in the vasculature. can cause similar infections.
Recall Question
Which of the following factors causes a left shift on the oxygen
hemoglobin dissociation curve?
A. Increased CO2
B. Metabolic acidosis
C. Temperature 40° C(104° F)
D. Decreased 2,3 BPG
E. Respiratory acidosis
Answer: D
173
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 173 15/10/22 2:21P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 174 15/10/22 2:21P
Ventilation/Perfusion
4#
Matching and Hypoxemia
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Demonstrate understanding of ventilation perfusion differences
in the lung
❏ Demonstrate understanding of review of the normal lung
❏ Answer questions about causes of hypoxemia
❏ Use knowledge of left to right shunts
VENTILATION/PERFUSION DIFFERENCES IN THE LUNG
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Regional Differences in Intrapleural Pressure
The regional difference of alveolar and
At FRC, the mean value for intrapleural pressure (IPP) is –5 cm H2O. However,
arterial pressure in the lung is referred to as
there are regional differences, and the reason for these differences is gravity.
“West zones” of the lung. The point is that
• Recall that the pleura is a fluid filled space. the ventilation perfusion ratio is higher in
• Similar to the cardiovascular system, it is subject to gravitational influ the apex of the lung (zone 1) in an upright
ences individual than it is in the base of the lung
– (P = height × gravity × density) (zone 3).
• Thus, IPP is higher (less negative) at the base (bottom) of the lung com
pared to the apex (top).
Regional Differences in Ventilation
• Because IPP is higher (less negative) at the base, the PTM is less, resulting
in less distension of alveoli, i.e., there is less volume.
• In contrast, IPP is more negative at the apex; thus the PTM is higher,
resulting in a greater volume in alveoli near the apex.
• As described in chapter 1, alveolar compliance decreases as lung volume
increases. Thus, alveoli near the base are more compliant than alveoli
near the apex. Stated another way, alveoli near the base are on a much
steeper portion of the pressure volume curve than alveoli near the apex
(Figure V 4 2).
• Because alveoli near the base are more compliant, there is more ventilation
in this region compared to the apex.
175
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 175 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
800
(mL
Volume
Pathology BehFavRiCoraSlcience/SociaSlciences
400
Apex
in
–10 –13
Change
200
Microbiology Mean
–5 –8
–2.5 –5.5 0 −2 −5 −10 −13 −15
Base Apex
Base
Intrapleural Pressure or Increasing Transpulmonary Pressure (cm H 2O)
Figure FVigIuIre 4V1.4 1U.prUigphrtight PPoosstuturere Figure FigureVIIV44 22..RRegeigoinoanlal VentilatVioenntilation
Regional Differences in Blood Flow
Even in a normal individual, there are regional differences in blood flow through
the pulmonary circuit. These differences, for the most part, can be attributed to the
effect of gravity.
• Moving toward the base (with gravity), pressure in the pulmonary arteries
is higher compared to pressure in the pulmonary arteries of the apex
(against gravity).
• Since the intravascular pressure in arteries is higher, there is more blood
flow to the base of the lung compared to the apex.
Ventilation–Perfusion Relationships
The partial pressures of O2 and CO2 in alveoli are determined by the combination
of ventilation (adding O2 and removing CO2) and perfusion (removing O2 and
adding CO2). However, it is not the absolute amount of either that determines the
composition of alveolar gases. Instead, it is the relative relationship between
ventilation and perfusion that ultimately determines the alveolar gases. This is
ventilation perfusion matching.
In the normal situation, it would be “ideal” if ventilation and perfusion (blood
flow) matched, i.e., the ventilation perfusion ratio is 1 (Figure V 4 3). If this were
the case, then:
• PaO2 = 100 mm Hg
• PaCO2 = 40 mm Hg
• The blood draining the alveolus would have a pH = 7.40 (normal
blood pH)
176
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 176 15/10/22 2:21PM
CHAPTER 4 | VENTILATION/PERFUSION MATCHING AND HYPOXEMIA
Although the above is “ideal,” it is not often encountered. The figure below
illustrates ventilation, blood flow (Q) or perfusion, and the relative ventilation
perfusion relationship for an upright individual. Toward the base of the lung:
• Alveolar ventilation is high relative to the apex (described above).
• Q is high relative to the apex (described above).
• However, relative to one another, Q is higher than alveolar ventilation,
thus the ventilation perfusion relationship is <1.0.
• In short, the alveoli are under ventilated relative to the perfusion. If
alveolar ventilation is inadequate, then it follows that PO2 falls, PCO2
rises, and blood pH falls (remember that CO2 generates H+).
• Thus, PaO2 at the base is <100 mm Hg and PaCO2 is >40 mm Hg.
Q
•
VA
Flow = 1.0
• Q
(ml/min) VA
Base Apex
PCO2 >40 PCO2 = 40 mm Hg PCO2 = <40
PO2 <100 PO2 = 100 mm Hg PO2 = >100
pH <7.4 pH = 7.400 pH = >7.4
• •
VA <1.0 VA = >1.0
Q Q
Figure V4 3. Ventilation–Perfusion Relationships
Figure VII 4 3. Ventilation–Perfusion Relationships
Moving toward the apex, the situation reverses:
• Alveolar ventilation is less relative to the base (described above).
• Q is less relative to the base (described above).
• However, relative to one another, Q is less than alveolar ventilation, thus
the ventilation perfusion relationship is >1.0.
• In short, the alveoli are over ventilated relative to the perfusion. If alveolar
ventilation is excessive, then it follows that PO2 rises, PCO2 falls and blood
pH increases (remember that CO2 generates H+).
• Thus, PAO2 at the apex is >100 mm Hg and PACO2 is <40 mm Hg.
The effect of the ventilation perfusion relationship is a continuum.
•
• As VA/Q falls, PO2 falls and PCO2 rises.
•
• As VA/Q rises, PO2 rises and PCO2 falls.
177
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 177 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Extremes of V•A/Q Mismatch
•
• Shunt: If ventilation is zero but there is blood flow, then VA/Q = 0.
– This is a right to left shunt, and the blood gases leaving the alveoli are
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences the same as venous blood (low PO2, and high PCO2; y axis intercept in
figure below). This causes arterial hypoxemia, which is discussed later
in this chapter.
• Alveolar dead space: If blood flow is zero but there is ventilation, then
•
Microbiology VA/Q = ∞.
– This is alveolar dead space, and alveolar gases become the same as
inspired (high PaO2 and PaCO2 = 0; x axis intercept in figure below).
To summarize:
•
• As VA/Q falls, PO2 falls and PCO2 rises. The extreme is a shunt.
•
– Remember, however, that the lower the VA/Q, the more it “behaves” as
a shunt, i.e., the alveolar and blood gases get closer and closer to venous
gases. Similar to a shunt, this can lead to arterial hypoxemia, both of
which are discussed later in this chapter.
•
• As VA/Q rises, PO2 rises and PCO2 falls. The extreme is alveolar dead
space.
•
– Similar to above, the higher the VA/Q, the more the situation looks like
alveolar dead space.
Shunt
•
VA/Q = 0
Base Optimum Apex
47
Hg) 40 Low VA/Q
(mm
30
High
VA/
PCO2 20
10
•
VA/Q = ∞
0
Dead space
40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150
PO2 (mm Hg)
Figure VII 4Figu4r.e ShVun4t 4. Shaunndt aDndeadDead SpSapcaece
Problem
The following ratios represent 2 lung units under resting conditions:
•
VA/Q
A = 0.62
B = 0.73
178
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 178 15/10/22 2:21PM
CHAPTER 4 | VENTILATION/PERFUSION MATCHING AND HYPOXEMIA
Both lung units A and B are underventilated, but of the two, B is better ventilated.
Which lung unit had the greatest:
PACO2, end capillary PCO2? (Answer: A)
PAO2, end capillary PO2? (Answer: B)
end capillary pH? (Answer: B)
Hypoxic Vasoconstriction
This is a clinically important phenomenon that is unique to the pulmonary
circulation. Whenever there is a decrease in alveolar PO2, a local vasoconstriction
of pulmonary blood vessels is produced. The result is a lowering of blood flow
through that lung unit and a redistribution of blood to better ventilated units.
Problem
If a person inhales a peanut that lodges in a peripheral airway, what changes would
you expect for the following variables in the peanut occluded unit?
PACO2 (increase)
PAO2 (decrease)
pulmonary end capillary pH (decrease)
blood flow in that lung unit (decrease)
All answers here are based on the fact that blocking the airway produces a shunt.
•
The blood flow decreases because of hypoxic vasoconstriction. Low V A/Q ratios
are associated with hypoxic vasoconstriction. If the pulmonary disease is severe
and widespread, the alveolar hypoxia and subsequent arteriolar vasoconstriction
increases pulmonary arterial pressure.
Problem
If a small thrombus lodges in a pulmonary artery, what changes would you expect
for the following variables in the thrombus occluded unit?
PACO2 (decrease)
PAO2 (increase)
pulmonary end capillary pH (increase)
•
All answers here are based on the fact that the thrombus increases the V A/Q ratio.
This produces lung units that act as dead space.
Exercise
In exercise, there is increased ventilation and pulmonary blood flow. However,
•
during exercise, ventilation increases more than cardiac output and V A/Q goes
well above 1.0 as one approaches maximal oxygen consumption. Also, the
flows are more uniform. base–apex
179
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 179 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
CLINICAL CORRELATE REVIEW OF THE NORMAL LUNG
As one ages, the A–a gradient increases Before discussing the causes of hypoxemia let’s review the normal state using
because ventilation perfusion matching standard values:
Pathologbyecomes less and less “Bideehaalv.”ioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
• The blood entering the alveolar capillary unit is mixed venous blood.
One formula for taking this into account is – PO2 = 40 and PCO2 = 45 mm Hg
_(a_g_e____+ 4) • PaO2 = 100 mm Hg and PaCO2 = 40 mm Hg
.
4
Microbiology • Both gases are perfusion limited and thus their partial pressures at the
end of the capillary are the same as alveolar.
• Arterial blood gas (ABG) sample shows PaO2 = 95 mm Hg, and PaCO2 =
40 mm Hg.
– The A–a gradient is 5 mm Hg (ranges 5 15 mm Hg but is influenced by
•
age) and is the result of anatomic shunts and areas of low VA/Q.
PAO2 = 100
Normal
PO2 = 100
(Pulmonary end
capillary)
PO2 = 40
RV LV
PaO2 = 95
Figure VII 4 5. Normal State
Figure V4 5. Normal State
CAUSES OF HYPOXEMIA
Hypoventilation
Hypoventilation of the entire lung elevates alveolar PCO2, and the increase
in PCO2 decreases PO2. For example, if alveolar ventilation decreases by 50%,
alveolar PCO2 becomes 80 mm Hg (an increase of 40 mm Hg).
Assuming a respiratory ratio close to 1.0, alveolar PO2 decreases by about 40–60
mm Hg. If no other problem exists, pulmonary end capillary and systemic arterial
PO2 also decrease by 40 mm Hg.
180
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 180 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 4 | VENTILATION/PERFUSION MATCHING AND HYPOXEMIA
If PACO2 = 80, then:
Hypoventilation
PAO2 = 60
PO2 = 60
(Pulmonary end
capillary)
PO2 < 40
RV LV
PaO2 = 55
Figure VII 4 6. Hypoventilation
Figure V 4 6. Hypoventilation
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Hypoventilation is characterized as an equal decrease in PO2 in all 3 compart
ments. As a result, A–a is normal and end tidal PO2 is still a good index of High altitude is sometimes categorized as a
systemic arterial PO2 (provided A–a gradient is taken into consideration).
fifth cause of hypoxemia.
The hypoxemia can be relieved by increasing the inspired oxygen; however, CO2 High altitude causes low PAO2, similar to
remains elevated because ventilation is unchanged.
hypoventilation. Allthe observations
In summary: described here apply, except for PCO2. At
high altitude, a subject hyperventilates, and
• There is no increase in the A–a oxygen gradient.
thus PAO2 and PACO2 are reduced.
• Supplemental oxygen can relieve the hypoxemia.
• End tidal air still reflects the systemic arterial compartment.
• The problem is not within the lung itself.
Diffusion Impairment BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY
Diffusion impairment means a structural problem in the lung. As described earlier Acutely, hypoventilation can be caused by
in this book, this can be produced by a decreased surface area and/or increased narcotics and general anesthetics. More
thickness of lung membranes. chronic conditions include COPD,
kyphoscoliosis, and neuromuscular disorders
such as Guillain Barré, Lambert Eaton, and
myasthenia gravis.
181
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 181 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Diffusion
impairment
PAO2
Microbiology
PO2 < PAO2
PO2 < 40
RV LV
PaO2 < PAO2
Figure V 4 7. Diffusion Impairment
Figure VII 4 7. Diffusion Impairment
In marked diffusion impairment, pulmonary end capillary PO2 is less than
alveolar PO2. End tidal PO2 is not a good index of systemic arterial PO2.
In diffusion impairment, supplemental oxygen corrects the hypoxemia. Note that
although the arterial PO2 may be restored to normal or even be above normal by
supplemental oxygen, there is still an abnormally large A–a gradient.
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY In summary:
Diffusion problems often occur in restrictive • There is an increase in A–a oxygen gradient.
pulmonary diseases, such as pulmonary
• Supplemental oxygen can relieve the hypoxemia.
fibrosis, asbestosis, and sarcoidosis. In
• End tidal air does not reflect the arterial values.
addition, pulmonary edema can cause a
• It is characterized by a decrease in DLCO.
diffusion impairment.
•
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY Ventilation Perfusion Mismatch: Low VA/Q Units
Some conditions that often result in If ventila • tion to a significant portion of the lungs • is markedly compromised,
then VA/Q is << 1.0. As described earlier, low VA/Q creates alveolar and
significant V•A/Q mismatch include severe
end pulmonary capillary blood gases that are approaching venous gases (low PO2,
obstruction (status asthmaticus, cystic •
and high CO2). The blood from these low V A/Q units mixes in with blood
fibrosis, anaphylaxis), infection (pneumonia),
draining normal alveolar capillary units, resulting in systemic hypoxemia.
partial occlusion of an airway (mucus plug,
•
foreign object), and pulmonary embolism. Because PAO2 is normal in areas that don’t have low VA/Q, the A–a gradient is
elevated. Supplemental oxygen corrects the hypoxemia because the problem
regions still have some ventilation—it is just much lower than normal. Similar to
diffusion impairment described above, the increased A–a gradient means end tidal
PO2 is not reflective of PAO2.
182
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 182 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 4 | VENTILATION/PERFUSION MATCHING AND HYPOXEMIA
In summary:
• There is an increased A–a oxygen gradient.
• Supplemental oxygen corrects the hypoxemia.
• End tidal air does not reflect the arterial values.
Intrapulmonary Shunt
By definition, systemic venous blood is delivered to the left side of the heart
without exchanging oxygen and carbon dioxide with the alveoli. A right to left
shunt leads to hypoxemia.
The figure below illustrates the consequences of an intrapulmonary shunt. The
solid line regions represent the normal areas of the lung. The dashed line repre
sents the shunted blood, which is passing from the right heart to the left heart
without a change in chemical composition.
Normal
lung
region BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY
PAO2 = 100
Intrapulmonary shunts are caused by
atelectatic lung regions (pneumothorax,
PO2 = 100
ARDS), complete occlusion of an airway
(mucus plug, foreign body), and the right to
Shunt left shunts created by heart defects
PO2 < 40
(tetralogy of Fallot).
PO2 < 4 0
RV LV
PaO2 < PAO2
Figure VII 4 F8ig.urePulmVon4ary8. PulmonarSyhunt Shunt
With an intrapulmonary shunt, systemic arterial PO2 is less than alveolar, resulting in
an elevated A–a gradient. End tidal PO2 does not reflect systemic arterial PO2.
When a significant intrapulmonary shunt exists, breathing pure O2 elevates
systemic arterial PO2 a small amount, but it often doesn’t correct the hypoxemia.
See the following figure for response of PAO2 with shunt.
The failure to obtain a significant increase in arterial PO2 following the
administration of supplemental oxygen in hypoxemia is strong evidence of the
presence of a shunt.
183
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 183 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
In summary:
• Increase in A–a oxygen gradient
• Supplemental oxygen ineffective at returning arterial PO2 to normal
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
• End tidal air does not reflect the arterial values
Response to supplemental oxygen with varying
Microbiology percentage of cardiac output that is shunted
700
Normal
600
10%
Hg
500
(mm
PO2 400
Arterial
300 20%
200
100 30% Common
40%
50 in ARDS
50%
0
20 40 60 80 100
% Inspired Oxygen
Figure VII 4Fig9u.re ReVspo4nse9. Response totoSSuupppplleemmeennttaall Oxygen Oxygen
LEFT TO RIGHT SHUNTS
Pressures are usually higher on the left side of the heart (atria and ventricles), and
thus flow is normally left to right. A major characteristic is that hypoxemia never
develops in a left to right shunt. The principal example is an atrial or ventricular
septal defect.
The normal PO2 values in the left and right compartments can be seen below. Note
from the descriptions that follow where the first increase in PO2 develops on the
right side.
184
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 184 15/10/22 2:21PM
CHAPTER 4 | VENTILATION/PERFUSION MATCHING AND HYPOXEMIA
Systemic Pulmonary
Numbers refer to normal PO2 in mm Hg
venous venous
40 100
Numbers refer to normal
PO2 in mm Hg
RA LA
40 100
RV LV
40 100
Pulmonary Systemic
arterial arterial
40 100
Figure V4 10. Left to Right Cardiac Shunts
Figure VII 4 10. Left to Right Cardiac Shunts
• Diagnosed clinically with echocardiogram with bubble study
• Most intracardiac shunts are left to right shunts. However, longstanding
uncorrected shunts result in a reversal of the shunt.
Table V 4 1. Consequences of 3 Left to Right Shunts
Atrial Septal Ventricular Patent Ductus
Defect Septal Defect (newborn)
Systemic arterial PO2 No change No change No change
Right atrial PO2 ↑ No change No change
Right ventricular PO2 ↑ ↑ No change
Pulmonary arterial ↑ ↑ ↑
PO2
Pulmonary blood flow ↑ ↑ ↑
Pulmonary arterial
↑ ↑ ↑
pressure
Atrial septal defect: PO2 increase first appears in right atrium
Ventricular septal defect: PO2 increase first appears in right ventricle
Patent ductus: PO2 increase appears in pulmonary artery
185
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 185 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART V | RESPIRATION
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Recall Question
In which of the following ways does myasthenia gravis cause
hypoxemia?
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
A. Neuromuscular junction pathology causes hypoventilation,
leading to chronic hypoxemia.
B. Myasthenia gravis increases the Aa oxygen gradient.
Microbiology
C. Fibrosis and sclerosis ofthe alveoli cause diffusion impairment.
D. Ventilation perfusion mismatch is caused by a fibrotic scar
form in the apex of the lung.
E. Complete occlusion of an airway is caused by a sclerotic
foreign body.
Answer: A
186
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 186 15/10/22 2:21P
PART VI
RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 187 15/10/22 2:21P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 188 15/10/22 2:21P
Renal Structure and
1#
Glomerular Filtration
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Use knowledge of overview of the renal system
❏ Demonstrate understanding of nephron hemodynamics
❏ Demonstrate understanding of glomerular filtration
THE RENAL SYSTEM
Functions of the Kidney
• Excrete waste products: urea, uric acid, creatinine
• Water and electrolyte balance
• Acid/base balance
• Secrete the hormone erythropoietin and the enzyme renin into the
circulation
• Hydroxylate 25 hydroxy Vit D to form the active form of vitamin D
(1,25 dihydroxy Vit D)
Functional Organization of the Kidney
The figure below illustrates the cortical versus the medullary organization of the
kidney. Nephrons (the functioning unit of the kidney) with glomeruli in the outer
cortex have short loops of Henle (cortical nephrons). Those with glomeruli in the
inner cortex have long loops of Henle that penetrate the medullary region (juxta
medullary nephrons).
• 7/8 of all nephrons are cortical nephrons
• 1/8 of all nephrons are juxtamedullary nephrons
Nephron structures in the medulla consist of the long loops of Henle and the
terminal regions of the collecting ducts. All other structures, including the first
section of the collecting ducts, are in the cortex.
• In the cortex, the proximal and distal tubules, as well as the initial
segment of the collecting duct, are surrounded by a capillary network, and
the interstitium is close to an isotonic environment (300 mOsm/kg).
• The medullary region has capillary loops organized similar to the loops of
Henle, known as the vasa recta.
• The slow flow through these capillary loops preserves the osmolar
gradient of the interstitium.
189
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 189 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
• However, this slow flow also keeps the PO2 of the medulla lower than that
in the cortex, and even though the metabolic rate of the medulla is lower
than in the cortex, it is more susceptible to ischemic damage.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Microbiology
Proximal Bowman's
tubule capsule
Corte
Distal
tubule
Outer Collecting
zone duct
Medulla
Inner
zone
Loop
of Henle
FiguFreigure VVIIII1 11. 1N.ephNroenphronStructuresStructures
190
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 190 15/10/22 2:21PM
CHAPTER 1 | RENAL STRUCTURE AND GLOMERULAR FILTRATION
Function of the Nephron
There are 4 basic renal processes: filtration, reabsorption, secretion, and excretion.
Filtration
• Blood is filtered by nephrons, the functional units of the kidney.
• Each nephron begins in a renal corpuscle (site of filtration), which is
composed of a glomerulus enclosed in a Bowman’s capsule.
• An ultrafiltrate resembling plasma enters Bowman’s space.
• Filtration is driven by Starling forces.
• The ultrafiltrate is passed through, in turn, the proximal convoluted
tubule, the loop of Henle, the distal convoluted tubule, and a series of
collecting ducts to form urine.
• Filtration rate or filtered load is the amount of a substance (in mg) that is
filtered at the glomeruli in a min (mg/min; see chapter 2 for more details).
Reabsorption
• Tubular reabsorption is the process by which solutes and water are
removed from the tubular fluid that was formed in Bowman’s space and
transported into the blood.
• Reabsorption rate is the amount (in mg) that is reabsorbed from the
ultrafiltrate in a min (mg/min; see chapter 2 for more details).
Secretion
• Tubular secretion is the transfer of materials from peritubular capillaries
to the renal tubular lumen.
• Tubular secretion is primarily the result of active transport.
• Usually only a few substances are secreted.
• Many drugs are eliminated by tubular secretion.
• Secretion rate is the amount (in mg) that is secreted into the ultrafiltrate
in a min (mg/min; see chapter 2 for more details).
Excretion
• Substances that are in the urine are excreted.
• A substance that is filtered and not completely reabsorbed is excreted in
the urine.
• A substance that is filtered and then secreted is excreted in large amounts
in the urine because it comes from 2 places in the nephron.
• Excretion rate is the amount (in mg) that is excreted in the urine in
a min (mg/min; see chapter 2 for more details).
191
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 191 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
afferent efferent
arteriole arteriole
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Glomerular
capillaries
Microbiology
1
Bowman’s
space
2
1: Filtration
Peritubular
capillaries
2: Reabsorption 3
3: Secretion
4
4: Excretion
Urine
Excretion = (filtration – reabsorption) + secretion
Figure FigurVeIIIVI1122.. RReennaall ProPcreoscseessses
The following equation is central to understanding renal physiology and will be
addressed in detail in a later chapter.
Excretion rate (ER) = (filtration rate − reabsorption rate) + secretion rate
Micturition Reflex
Micturition is a reflex regulated by the peripheral nervous system. The autonomic
component exists at birth, continuing throughout life, but the motor component
requires sufficient maturation of the nervous system, which occurs around age 2.
This section discusses the physiologic regulation that occurs in sufficiently mature
individuals. In this case, nuclei in the medulla ultimately regulate the phase,
switching between the filling and voiding phases.
Filling phase
• This phase is typically the longest and is dominated by the sympathetic
nervous system (SNS).
• Sympathetic input relaxes the detrusor muscle via the β 3 receptor
(Gs cAMP). In addition, sympathetic input contracts the internal sphinc
ter via α 1 receptors.
• As a result, the bladder can fill with urine.
192
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 192 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 1 | RENAL STRUCTURE AND GLOMERULAR FILTRATION
Voiding phase CLINICAL CORRELATE
• As the bladder fills, the pressure of the fluid causes distension of the Spinal cord injury can markedly alter the
bladder. micturition reflex. Alumbar lesion can
• This distension activates sensory afferent neurons (not depicted in figure), eliminate voluntary control (motor nerves
resulting in activation of the parasympathetic nervous system (PNS) and exit L1–L3) and the sympathetic component
inhibition of the SNS (spinal reflex). In addition, in the sufficiently mature (T10–T12). Over time, the PNS component
individual, it sends input to the medulla and cortex signaling that voiding
can return (S1–S3) and voiding can be
is needed.
initiated when the bladder is sufficiently
• PNS activation causes contraction of the detrusor muscle (M3). This
filled.
initiates voiding.
• However, the external sphincter is controlled voluntarily (nicotinic
receptor). If voiding is inappropriate at that moment, voluntary contrac
tion of this sphincter stops the voiding process.
• If the voiding reflex is thwarted voluntarily, the bladder initially relaxes
(stretch induced relaxation of smooth muscle), reducing the pressure and
the sensory drive to void.
• However, continued filling of the bladder increases pressure and re initi
ates the sensory input, attempting to start the voiding process.
• Typically, one voluntarily relaxes the external sphincter by inhibiting
motor output (Ach via nicotinic receptor), and the bladder is emptied.
Figure VI 1 3. Control of Micturition
193
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 193 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
1500
200 RBF
/min Autoregulatory
GFR
range
(mL
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Flow
1000
Glomerular
Blood
100
Microbiology
Renal Filtration
500
Rate
(ml/min)
0 0
0 50 100 150 200
Mean Arterial Pressure (mm Hg)
Figure VIII 1 4. Autoregulation and the Renal Function Curve
Figure VI 1 4. Autoregulation and the Renal Function Curve
NEPHRON HEMODYNAMICS
Autoregulation
Blood flow throughout the kidney: renal artery → arcuate artery → afferent
arteriole → glomerular capillaries → efferent arterioles → peritubular capillaries
→ vasa recta → arcuate vein → renal vein
The kidneys are very effective in autoregulating blood flow. This is primarily due to
changes in the resistance of the afferent arterioles, for which 2 mechanisms are
involved:
• Myogenic responses: the intrinsic property of smooth muscle is to
contract when stretched (see CV chapter)
• Tubuloglomerular feedback (TGF)
– Increased MAP leads to an increase in RBF and GFR
– High delivery of sodium ions to the macula densa (the part of the
nephron where the thick ascending loop of Henle connects with the
beginning of the distal tubule) → adenosine and ATP secretion →
vasoconstriction of the afferent arteriole → decreases renal blood flow
and GFR.
– Decreased delivery of sodium to the macula densa dilates the arteriole
and leads to an increase in renal blood flow and GFR
194
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 194 15/10/22 2:21PM
CHAPTER 1 | RENAL STRUCTURE AND GLOMERULAR FILTRATION
Series Hemodynamics
The individual nephrons that make up both kidneys are connected in parallel.
However, the flow through a single nephron represents 2 arterioles and 2 capillary
beds connected in series.
Flow must be equal at all points in any series system. If flow changes, it changes
equally at all points in the system.
Flow (Q) = pressure gradient /resistance (R) =
(upstream pressure downstream pressure)
Blood flows from high pressure to low pressure. Two factors decrease flow:
• Decreasing the pressure gradient (decreasing the upstream pressure or
increasing the downstream pressure)
• Increasing resistance at any point throughout the circuit
Therefore, when considering blood flow through the nephron as a series circuit, if
resistance increases (vasoconstriction) at the afferent arteriole or efferent arteriole,
renal plasma flow decreases.
When an arteriole vasoconstricts, this increases the resistance at that arteriole and
there are 2 changes to consider:
• Flow across the entire circuit decreases.
• Pressure builds up or increases before (upstream) the point of
resistance and pressure decreases after (downstream) the point of resis
tance.
When an arteriole vasodilates, this decreases the resistance at that arteriole, and
there are 2 changes to consider:
• Flow across the entire circuit increases.
• Pressure decreases before (upstream) the point of resistance and pressure
rises after (downstream) the point of resistance.
Hemodynamics of a single nephron
The hemodynamics of a single nephron can be seen below. Connected in series are
the high pressure filtering capillaries of the glomerulus and the low pressure
reabsorbing peritubular capillaries.
The glomerular capillaries have a very high hydrostatic pressure because the
efferent arterioles are very narrow and thus have a very high resistance. Likewise,
there is a large pressure drop as blood flows past this high resistant arteriole, and
the peritubular capillaries have very low hydrostatic pressure.
195
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 195 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
45 mm Hg
R1 R2
capillaries
Artery
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
R1 = Afferent arteriole
Microbiology R2 = Efferent arteriole
Filtration
R1: afferent arteriole
Peritubular
R2: efferent arteriole
Reabsorption capillaries
Proximal 7–8 mm Hg
tubule
Figure VI1 5. Glomerular Hemodynamics
Figure VIII 1 5. Glomerular Hemodynamics
Independent response of the afferent and efferent arterioles
The table below illustrates the expected consequences of independent isolated
constrictions or dilations of the afferent and efferent arterioles.
Table VI 1 1. Consequences of Independent Isolated
Constrictions or Dilations of the Afferent and Efferent Arterioles
Glomerular Cap Peritubular Cap Nephron Plasma
Pressure Pressure Flow
Constrict ↑ ↓ ↓
efferent
Dilate efferent ↓ ↑ ↑
Constrict
↓ ↓ ↓
afferent
Dilate afferent ↑ ↑ ↑
GLOMERULAR FILTRATION
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is the rate at which fluid is filtered into Bowman’s
capsule. The units of filtration are volume filtered per unit time, e.g., mL/min or
liters/day; in a young healthy adult it is about 120 mL/min or 180 L/day.
If one kidney is removed (half of the functioning nephrons lost), GFR decreases
only about 25% because the other nephrons compensate.
196
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 196 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 1 | RENAL STRUCTURE AND GLOMERULAR FILTRATION
Factors Determining Net Filtration Pressure
There are 4 factors that determine net filtration pressure.
PGC: hydrostatic pressure of glomerular capillary
Capillary
πGC: oncotic pressure of glomerular capillary
PBS: hydrostatic pressure of Bowman’s space
πBS: oncotic pressure of Bowman’s space
PGC
πGC
Bowman’s
PBS
capsule
πBS
Figure VI 1 6. Determinants of Filtration
Figure VIII 1 6. Determinants of Filtration
Hydrostatic pressure of the glomerular capillaries
PGC: The hydrostatic pressure of the glomerular capillaries is the only force that promotes
filtration. Under normal conditions, this is the main factor that determines GFR.
Oncotic pressure of the plasma
πGC: The oncotic pressure of the plasma varies with the concentration of plasma
proteins. Because fluid is filtered but not protein, oncotic pressure, which opposes
filtration, increases from the beginning to the end of the glomerular capillaries.
Hydrostatic pressure in Bowman’s space
PBS: The hydrostatic pressure in Bowman’s capsule opposes filtration. Normally, it
is low and fairly constant and does not affect the rate of filtration. However, it
increases and reduces filtration whenever there is an obstruction downstream,
such as a blocked ureter or urethra (postrenal failure).
Protein or oncotic pressure in Bowman’s space
πBS: This represents the protein or oncotic pressure in Bowman’s space. Very little if any
protein is present, and for all practical purposes this factor can be considered zero.
Normal Values
PBS = 8 mm Hg
PGC = 45 mm Hg
πBS = 0 mm Hg
πGC = 24 mm Hg
Net filtration pressure = PGC – πGC – PBS = 45 – 24 – 8 = 13 mm Hg
197
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 197 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY To summarize, filtration at the glomeruli depends on Starling forces:
In nephrotic syndrome there is marked dis
• The glomerular capillaries have very high hydrostatic pressures (this is
ruption of the filtering membrane. As a why filtration occurs here)
Pathologryesult, plasma proteins BpeahssaviortahSlrcoiuengche/SocitahSleciences
• Increasing the glomerular hydrostatic pressure → increases GFR
membrane and are eliminated in the urine.
• Decreasing the glomerular hydrostatic pressure → decreases GFR
This is typically associated with a non
inflammatory injury to the glomerular mem Oncotic pressure opposes GFR → ↑ plasma protein → ↑ oncotic pressure → ↓
Microbiolobgrayne system. Most common clinical signs: GFR (no effect on RPF) ↓ plasma protein → ↓ oncotic pressure → ↑ GFR (no
effect on RPF)
• Marked proteinuria >3.5 g/day
(because of disrupted glomerular The increased concentration of protein (increased oncotic pressure) is carried into
the peritubular capillaries and promotes a greater net force of reabsorption.
membrane system)
• Edema (loss of plasma oncotic Important: If the main driving force for GFR is the hydrostatic pressure, what is
the main driving force for the reabsorption at the proximal tubule? The force that
pressure)
is driving reabsorption at the proximal tubule is the oncotic pressure in the
• Hypoalbuminemia (albumin lost in peritubular capillaries.
urine)
• Lipiduria (lipids in urine) Filtering Membrane
The membrane of the glomerulus consists of 3 main structures:
• Hyperlipidemia (increased lipid
synthesis in liver) • Capillary endothelial wall with fenestrations that have a magnitude greater
than proteins; in addition, the wall is covered with negatively charged
In nephritic syndrome, there is an
compounds
inflammatory disruption of the glomerular
• Glomerular basement membrane made up of a matrix of extracellular
membrane system. This disruption allows
negatively charged proteins and other compounds
proteins and cells to cross the filtering
membrane. Most common clinical signs: • Epithelial cell layer of podocytes next to Bowman’s space; the podocytes
have foot processes bridged by filtration slit diaphragms
• Proteinuria <3.5 g/day (evidence of
Around the capillaries is the mesangium, containing mesangial cells similar to
disrupted membrane)
monocytes.
• Hematuria (disrupted membrane)
The capillary wall with its fenestrated endothelium, the basement membrane with
• Oliguria (inflammatory infiltrates hydrated spaces, and the interdigitating foot processes of the podocytes combined
reduce fluid movement across the with an overall large surface area, create a high hydraulic conductivity (permeable
membrane) to water and dissolved solutes). Passage of large proteins is restricted because of
negative charge of the membrane system.
• Hypertension (inability of kidney to
regulate the extracellular volume) In addition to the net hydraulic force, GFR depends on both the permeability and
the surface area of the filtering membrane. The decrease in GFR in most diseased
• Azotemia (inability to filter and excrete states is due to a reduction in the membrane surface area. This also includes a
urea) decrease in the number of functioning nephrons.
Materials Filtered
The following are easily or freely filtered:
• Major electrolytes: sodium, chloride, potassium, bicarbonate
• Metabolic waste products: urea, creatinine
• Metabolites: glucose, amino acids, organic acids (ketone bodies)
• Nonnatural substances: inulin, PAH (p aminohippuric acid)
• Lower weight proteins and peptides: insulin, myoglobin
198
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 198 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 1 | RENAL STRUCTURE AND GLOMERULAR FILTRATION
The following are not freely filtered:
• Albumin and other plasma proteins
• Lipid soluble substances transported in the plasma attached to proteins,
such as lipid soluble bilirubin, T4 (thyroxine), other lipid soluble hor
mones; unbound lipid soluble substances such as free cortisol are filtered
and can appear in the urine
As blood flows through the glomerular capillary, plasma is filtered, but albumin is
not, so the plasma albumin concentration and oncotic pressure increase.
Fluid Entering Bowman’s Capsule
The fluid entering Bowman’s space is an ultrafiltrate of plasma; that is, the filtrate
has the same concentration of dissolved substances as plasma, except proteins. The
osmolality of the filtrate is 300 mOsm/kg. The criteria for effective osmolality are
the same as those previously stated for extracellular fluid (part I).
If a substance is freely filtered by the kidney, the ratio of the filtrate concentration
to plasma concentration TF/P = 1.0. This means the concentrations in Bowman’s
space and the plasma are the same.
Filtration Fraction
The following formula for filtration fraction (FF) and the normal values given
should be memorized.
FF = fraction of the material entering the kidney that is filtered
normally 0.20 or 20% for a freely filtered substance
FF = _G_F__R GFR = 120 mL/min
RPF RPF (renal plasma flow) = 600 mL/min
= _1_2_0____m_L__/min = 0.20 or 20%
600 mL/min
FF affects oncotic pressure in the peritubular capillary (πPC). The greater the FF,
the higher the oncotic pressure in the peritubular capillaries; that is because FF
represents loss of protein free fluid into Bowman’s space, thereby increasing the
concentration of protein in the plasma.
• If FF decreases, then πPC decreases
• Only 20% of the renal plasma flow is filtered. Every minute 600 mL
of plasma enters the kidneys. That is the renal plasma flow.
• 20% or 120 mL of plasma is filtered hence a GFR of 120 mL.
199
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 199 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Recall Question
Which of the following best indicates the effect of a drug that
dilates the efferent arterioles of the kidney?
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
A. Decreased glomerular cap pressure, decreased peritubular
cap pressure, increased nephron plasma flow
B. Decreased glomerular cap pressure, increased peritubular cap
Microbiology
pressure, increased nephron plasma flow
C. Decreased glomerular cap pressure, decreased peritubular
cap pressure, decreased in nephron plasma flow
D. Increased glomerular cap pressure, increased peritubular cap
pressure, increased in nephron plasma flow
E. Increased glomerular cap pressure, decreased peritubular cap
pressure, increased nephron flow
Answer: B
Factors Affecting FF
Based on the preceding discussion, the following should be expected for afferent
versus efferent constriction:
Afferent Constriction Efferent Constriction
Glomerular filtration ↓ ↑
pressure
GFR ↓ ↑
RPF ↓ ↓
FF ↔ ↑
Effects of Sympathetic Nervous System
Stimulation of the sympathetic neurons to the kidney causes vasoconstriction of
the arterioles, but has a greater effect on the afferent arteriole. As a consequence:
• RPF decreases
• PGC decreases
• GFR decreases
• FF increases
• PPC decreases
• πPC increases
• Increased forces promoting reabsorption in the peritubular capillaries
because of a lower peritubular capillary hydrostatic pressure and an
increase in plasma oncotic pressure (FF increases)
200
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 200 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 1 | RENAL STRUCTURE AND GLOMERULAR FILTRATION
Effects of Angiotensin II CLINICAL CORRELATE
Angiotensin II (Ang II) is a vasoconstrictor. It constricts both the afferent and ef A25 year old man spends a week in the
ferent arterioles, but it has a bigger effect on the efferent arteriole. As a conse desert. Due to severe dehydration, his
quence: volume status is depleted → high
• RPF decreases angiotensin II → vasoconstriction of the
efferent arterioles → an increase in GFR
• PGC increases
and decrease in RPF → an increase in
• GFR increases
FF → more plasma filtered in the glomeruli
• FF increases → higher albumin concentration (hence
• PPC decreases higher oncotic pressure) in the glomerular
capillaries → higher oncotic pressure in the
• πPC increases
peritubular capillaries → an increase in
• Increased forces promoting reabsorption in the peritubular capillaries
peritubular reabsorption. Therefore, an
because of a lower peritubular capillary hydrostatic pressure and an
increase in the FF → an increase in
increase in plasma oncotic pressure (FF increases)
reabsorption at the proximal tubules.
During a stress response, there is an increase in sympathetic input and very high
levels of circulating angiotensin II. As a consequence: Adehydrated patient needs to increase
reabsorption of fluid at the proximal tubules
• Increased sympathetic tone to the kidneys and very high levels of angio
to preserve volume. Angiotensin II helps
tensin II vasoconstrict both the afferent and the efferent arterioles.
preserve GFR and volume in a volume
Because both arterioles constrict, there is a large drop in the RPF and only
depleted state.
a small drop in the GFR.
• The net effect is an increase in FF.
• The increase in FF → increase in oncotic pressure → increase in the CLINICAL CORRELATE
reabsorption in proximal tubules.
What would happen if you gave NSAIDs to
• Overall, less fluid is filtered and a greater percentage of that fluid is the 75 year old man who is hemorrhaging?
reabsorbed in the proximal tubule, leading to preservation of volume in a
volume depleted state. During a stress state the increase in
sympathetic tone causes vasoconstriction of
• There is also an increase in ADH due to the low volume state.
the afferent arterioles. The same stimuli
• Activation of the sympathetic nervous system also directly increases renin
activate a local production of
release.
prostaglandins. Prostaglandins lead to
The net effect of angiotensin II is to preserve GFR in volume depleted state. In a vasodilation of the afferent arterioles, thus
volume depleted state, a decrease in GFR is beneficial because less fluid filtered modulating the vasoconstriction. Unopposed,
results in less fluid excretion (however, a very large decrease in GFR prevents
the vasoconstriction from the sympathetic
removal of waste products like creatinine and urea). Angiotensin II prevents a
nervous system and angiotensin II can lead
large decrease in GFR.
to a profound reduction in RPF and GFR,
which in turn, could cause renal failure.
NSAIDs inhibit synthesis of prostaglandins
and interfere with these protective effects.
201
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 201 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
CLINICAL CORRELATE There is no parasympathetic innervation of the kidney.
ACE inhibitors and ARBs are used for
Although prostaglandins seem to play little role in the normal regulation of renal
diabetic nephropathy because they lead to a blood flow, they do become important in times of stress. For example, the vaso
Pathologryeduction in glomerular cBaephiallvairoyraSlcienpcrees/SsuorceiaSlciencaensd constriction produced by sympathetic activation is partially countered by the local
reduce damage and fibrosis of the glomeruli release of vasodilating prostaglandins (PGI2 and PGE2). This is thought to help
prevent ischemic damage during times of stress.
(which will delay the need for hemodialysis).
They treat hyperfiltration. In most cases, there
Microbioloisgya small and transient drop in GFR.
Inhibition of angiotensin IIleads to
vasodilation of the efferent arteriole, which
leads to decreased glomerular capillary
pressure and decreased GFR. It also leads to
increased RPF because of the decrease in
resistance to flow. The pressure downstream
from the efferent arteriole (peritubular
capillary pressure) increases because there
is a decreased resistance at the EA.
Use the following guidelines for using ACE
inhibitors and ARBs:
• Give ACE inhibitors to patients with
nephrotic syndrome and stable chronic
renal failure.
• Avoid ACE inhibitors and ARBs in
patients with severely compromised
GFR (risk of hyperkalemia) and with
acute renal failure.
• ACE inhibitors and ARBs may cause a
type IV RTA because they block
aldosterone (leading to hyperkalemia);
in this case they must both be held. If
ACE inhibitors cause hyperkalemia, so
will ARBs.
• Switch from ACE inhibitor to ARB in
cases with ACE inhibitor cough, not for
hyperkalemia.
• ACE inhibitors and ARBs are
contraindicated in bilateral renal
artery stenosis, where both kidneys
have such low perfusion that GFR is
highly dependent on constriction of EA.
When the effect of angiotensin IIis
removed, the result is a significant
drop in GFR and acute renal failure.
202
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 202 15/10/22 2:21P
Solute Transport:
2#
Reabsorption and Secretion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Interpret scenarios on solute transport
❏ Interpret scenarios on quantifying renal processes (mass balance)
❏ Demonstrate understanding of clearance
❏ Answer questions about TM tubular reabsorption
❏ Solve problems concerning TM tubular secretion
❏ Use knowledge of the renal handling of some important solutes
SOLUTE TRANSPORT
Transport proteins in the cell membranes of the nephron mediate the reabsorption
and secretion of solutes and water transport in the kidneys. Acquired defects in
transport proteins are the cause of many kidney diseases.
In addition, the transport proteins are important drug targets.
Transport Mechanisms
Simple diffusion
• Net movement represents molecules or ions moving down their electro
chemical gradient.
• This doesn’t require energy.
Facilitated diffusion (facilitated transport)
• A molecule or ion moving across a membrane down its concentration
gradient attached to a specific membrane bound protein
• This doesn’t require energy.
Active transport
• A protein mediated transport that uses ATP as a source of energy to move
a molecule or ion against its electrochemical gradient.
203
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 203 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Dynamics of Protein Mediated Transport
Uniport
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences • Transporter moves a single molecule or ion as in the uptake of glucose
into skeletal muscle or adipose tissue. This is an example of facilitated
diffusion.
Microbiology
Symport (cotransport)
• A coupled protein transport of 2 or more solutes in the same direction as
in Na glucose, Na amino acid transporters
Antiport (countertransport)
• A coupled protein transport of 2 or more solutes in the opposite direction
Generally, protein carriers transport substances that cannot readily diffuse across a
membrane. There are no transporters for gases and most lipid soluble substances
because those substances readily move across membranes by simple diffusion.
Characteristics common to all protein mediated transport
Rate of transport: A substance is transported more rapidly than it would be by
diffusion, because the membrane is not usually permeable to any substance for
which there is a transport protein.
Saturation kinetics: As the concentration of the substance initially increases on
one side of the membrane, the transport rate increases.
• Once the transporters become saturated, transport rate is maximal (TM =
transport maximum). Rate of transport is dependent upon:
– Concentration of solute
– Number of functioning transporters; the only way to increase TM is to
add more protein carriers to the membrane
• Once all the protein carriers are saturated, the solutes are transported
across the membrane at a constant rate. This constant rate is TM.
• There is no TM in simple diffusion.
Chemical specificity: To be transported, the substance must have a certain
chemical structure. Generally, only the natural isomer is transported (e.g.,
D glucose but not L glucose).
Competition for carrier: Substances of similar chemical structure may compete
for the same transporter. For example, glucose and galactose generally compete for
the same transport protein.
Primary and secondary transport
• In primary active transport, ATP is consumed directly by the transporting
protein, (e.g., the Na/K ATPase pump, or the calcium dependent ATPase
of the sarcoplasmic reticulum).
204
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 204 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 2 | SOLUTE TRANSPORT: REABSORPTION AND SECRETION
• Secondary active transport depends indirectly on ATP as a source of
energy, as in the cotransport of Na glucose in the proximal tubule. This
process depends on ATP utilized by the Na/K ATPase pump.
• Glucose moves up a concentration gradient via secondary active transport.
The figure below represents a renal proximal tubular cell.
Lumen ISF
Na
3 Na+
ATP
Glucose
2 K+
Luminal Basal
membrane membrane
Glucose moved up a concentration
gradient via secondary active transport
Figure VI 2 1. Renal Tubule or Small Intestine
Figure VIII 2 1. Renal Tubule or Small Intestine
The Na/K ATPase pump maintains a low intracellular sodium concentration,
which creates a large gradient across the cell membrane. It is this sodium gradient
across the luminal membrane that drives secondary active transport of glucose.
In summary, the secondary active transport of glucose:
• Depends upon luminal sodium
• Is stimulated by luminal sodium (via increased sodium gradient)
• Is linked to the uptake of sodium
• Depends upon rate of metabolic ATP production
Another example of secondary active transport is the counter transport of
Na–H+ also in the proximal tubule. This process depends on the Na/K ATPase
pump.
205
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 205 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Lumen ISF
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
3 Na
ATP
Na
Microbiology
2 K+
–
H+ HCO3
H+
Luminal Basal
membrane CO2 membrane
H+ moved up a concentration gradient
via secondary active transport
Figure FiguVreIII VI222.2. PPrrooxxiimmaall TubuleTubule
QUANTIFYING RENAL PROCESSES (MASS BALANCE)
As stated earlier, there are 4 processes in the nephron: filtration, reabsorption,
secretion, and excretion. The figure below illustrates that how the nephron handles
any solute—on a net basis—can be derived because the rate at which it enters
(filtered load) and its rate of excretion can be measured.
Both variables are expressed as an amount of substance per unit time, and the
units are the same, e.g., mg/min.
UX: urine concentration of substance
Filtered load = GFR ⫻ Px
V: urine flow rate Amount/time Volume/time Amount/volume
mg/min ml/min mg/ml
Ux= Urine concentration
Excretion = Ux ⫻ V
of substance
V =Urine flow rate Amount/time Amount/volume Volume/time
mg/min mg/ml ml/min
Figure VIII 2 3. Relationship of Filtered Load and Excretion
Figure VI2 3. Relationship of Filtered Load and Excretion
206
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 206 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 2 | SOLUTE TRANSPORT: REABSORPTION AND SECRETION
No Net Tubular Modification
• Filtered load = excretion rate
• The amount filtered and amount excreted per unit time are always the
same, e.g., inulin, mannitol.
Net Reabsorption
• Filtered load > excretion
• Excretion is always less than filtered load, e.g., glucose sodium, urea.
• If the substance is completely reabsorbed, the rate of filtration and the rate
of reabsorption are equal.
• Excretion rate is 0.
• If the substance is partially reabsorbed, excretion is less than filtration.
Net Secretion
• Filtered load < excretion
• Excretion is always greater than filtered load, e.g., PAH, creatinine.
• Creatinine is freely filtered, and a very small amount is secreted.
The following formula is sometimes used to calculate net transport. The sign of the
calculated number will indicate the 3 basic categories:
0 = no net transport
GFR = glomerular filtration rate
+ = net reabsorption
units = volume/time, e.g., mL/min
− = net secretion
Px = free (not bound to protein)
net transport rate = filtered load − excretion rate concentration of substance in plasma
units = amount/volume, e.g., mg/mL
= (GFR × Px) − (Ux × V)
Problem: Given the following information, calculate the reabsorption rate for
glucose.
GFR = 120 mL/min
Plasma glucose = 300 mg/100 mL
Urine flow = 2 mL/min
Urine glucose = 10 mg/mL
Answer: 340 mg/min
CLEARANCE
Clearance refers to a theoretical volume of plasma from which a substance is
removed over a period of time. Applying the principles of mass balance above, if a
solute has an ER, then it is cleared by the kidney. In other words, if it is filtered and
not fully reabsorbed or is secreted, then it appears in the urine and is thus cleared
from the body.
If, on the other hand, it is filtered and then all is reabsorbed, the ER and clearance
are zero, and it is not cleared by the kidney.
207
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 207 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
For example, if the concentration of substance x is 4 molecules per liter and
the excretion of x is 4 molecules per minute, the volume of plasma cleared of x is 1
L per minute.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences If the excretion of x decreases to 2 molecules per minute, the volume cleared of x is
only 0.5 L per minute. If the concentration of x decreases to 2 molecules per liter
of plasma and excretion is maintained at 2 molecules per minute, the cleared
volume is back to 1 L per minute.
Microbiology
Table VI 2 1. Example Calculations of Clearance Values
Plasma Concentration Excretion Rate Volume Cleared
(molecules/L) (molecules/minute) (L/minute)
4 4 1.0
4 2 0.5
2 2 1.0
Ux: urine concentration of x Thus, the factors that determine clearance are the plasma concentration of the
substance and its excretion rate.
V: urine flow rate
Excretion rate of x Ux × V
Clearance of x = =
Px: plasma concentration of x Px Px
The plasma concentration of the substance and its urine concentration must be in
the same units, which then cancel.
Urine flow (V) is a volume per unit time, and the units of V become the units of
clearance.
Clearance is a volume of plasma cleared of a substance per unit time, mL/min or
L/day.
Problem: Using the following information, calculate the clearance of x, y, and z.
V = 2 mL/min
Ux = 2 mg/mL Px = 2 mg/mL
Uy = 0 mg/mL Py = 13.6 mg/mL
Uz = 0.5 mg/mL Pz = 1 mg/mL
Answer: x = 2 mL/min, y = 0, and z = 1 mL/min
TM TUBULAR REABSORPTION
Glucose
The dynamics of glucose filtration, reabsorption, and excretion are seen below, ap
plying the mass balance and clearance principles discussed earlier. Many substanc
es are reabsorbed via a TM system, and glucose serves as our prototypical example.
208
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 208 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 2 | SOLUTE TRANSPORT: REABSORPTION AND SECRETION
800
N: normal plasma glucose concentration
T: plasma (renal) threshold
(mg/min) 600
Filtered
Rate TM = 375 mg/min Reabsorbed
400
Glucose
Excrete
Splay
200
Splay
N T
GFR = 120 ml/min
0
2 4 6 8
Glucose Concentration in Plasma (mg/mL)
Figure VI 2 4. Transport Maximum Reabsorption of Glucose
The y axis is glucose rate (mg/min). There are 3 rates: filtration (dashed line),
excretion (blue line); and reabsorption (purple line), which is filtered load
(filtration rate) − excretion rate (ER).
• At low plasma levels, the filtration and reabsorption rates of glucose
are equal, thus glucose does not appear in the urine and the clearance is
zero.
• TM is the maximal reabsorption rate of glucose, i.e., the rate when all the
carriers (SGLT 2/1) are saturated. TM can be used as an index of the
number of functioning nephrons.
• The rounding of the reabsorption curve into the plateau is called splay.
Splay occurs because some nephrons reach TM before others. Thus, TM
for the entire kidney is not reached until after the region of splay.
• Plasma (or renal) threshold is the plasma glucose concentration at which
glucose first appears in the urine. This occurs at the beginning of splay.
Before splay, all of the glucose that is filtered is reabsorbed and the ER is 0.
TM TUBULAR SECRETION
P Aminohippuric Acid Secretion
P aminohippuric acid (PAH) secretion from the peritubular capillaries into the
proximal tubule is an example of a transport maximum system. As a TM system, it
has the general characteristics discussed for the reabsorption of glucose except for
the direction of transport.
209
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 209 15/10/22 2:21PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
The figure below illustrates the renal handling of PAH at low plasma
concentrations.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences Glomerular capillaries
100% of PAH
entering kidney
Microbiology
20%
Peritubular
80% capillaries
20% 100% of PAH entering
80% kidney excreted
FigFuirgeure VVIIII2 52. 5S.ecreSteiocnretionof PAHof PAH
Normal values:
Renal plasma flow = 600 mL/min
GFR = 120 mL/min
FF = 0.20
• The renal plasma flow (RPF) is the volume of plasma that enters the
kidney in a minute (600 mL/min).
• The RPF contains the total concentration of PAH dissolved in plasma in
mg/ml entering the PAH.
• Of the RPF, 20% (120 mL) is typically filtered, regardless of the total
amount of PAH entering the kidney (in the RPF).
• Whatever is filtered is excreted, it is NOT reabsorbed; therefore, that 20%
is always cleared (removed from the plasma) and excreted (placed in the
urine)!!
• If the plasma concentration is below the TM for PAH, then the remaining
80% in the plasma is secreted into the lumen.
• Since PAH is not reabsorbed, then all the PAH is cleared by the kidney
and thus the clearance of PAH provides effective renal plasma flow
(ERPF). It is called ERPF because a portion of the blood flow entering the
kidney does not go to the glomerulus (perfuses renal capsule).
• Determining ERPF allows one to estimate RBF:
RBF = _R_P_F_ − hematocrit (HCT)
1
210
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 210 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 2 | SOLUTE TRANSPORT: REABSORPTION AND SECRETION
Suppose the concentration of PAH in the plasma entering the kidney is 1 mg/mL.
• 0.2 mg/mL gets filtered (filtration fraction of 20%).
• The remaining 0.8 mg/mL is secreted into the lumen, thus all 1 mg of
PAH is now in the tubule.
What happens if the plasma concentration exceeds the TM for PAH?
Let’s say the plasma concentration is 2 mg/mL. 0.4 mg is filtered (filtration fraction
of 20%).
• If the TM for PAH is 1 mg/mL, then only 1 mg of PAH is added to the
tubule; the remaining PAH (0.6 mg) leaves via the renal vein.
• Since only 1.4 mg of PAH is in the tubule, the clearance of PAH now
underestimates ERPF.
• Further, as the plasma concentration increases, the clearance of PAH only
increases in proportion to the rise in filtered load (~20% of the plasma
PAH), but the plasma increases 80% (TM reached, so all “excess” PAH
stays in the plasma). Thus, the higher the plasma PAH, the lower the
clearance.
These points are summarized in the figure below.
200
(rate) Filtration: linear relationship with plasma concentration and
Acid 160 Excreted represents 20% of PAH delivered to kidney
(mg/min) Secretion: initially 4× filtration rate and represents 80% of PAH
Aminohipp1u2r0ic
delivered to kidney. Therefore, initially all the PAH delivered to
kidney is removed—20% by filtration and 80% by
80 TM = 80 mg/min Secreted secretion—and the concentration of PAH in the renal venous
plasma should be zero. As plasma level rises, secretion
Filtere
increases, reaching maximum rate (TM) when the carriers are
p 40 saturated. PAH appears in renal venous plasma at the
beginning of splay region in the secretion curve.
0
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 Excretion: sum of the filtration rate and secretion rate. Once TM
is reached, increases in excretion parallel increases in filtration.
PAH Concentration in Plasma
(mg/ml)
Figure VIII 2 6. Excretion of PAH
Figure VI 2 6. Excretion of PAH
Transport of Organic Acids/Bases
PAH is transported by a fairly nonspecific organic anion transporter (OAT). Many
compounds compete for the carriers. In addition to PAH, some of those com
pounds include:
• Penicillin
• Furosemide
• Acetazolamide
• Salicylate
211
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 211 15/10/22 2:21PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Because the organic anions all compete for the same carriers, elevation of the
plasma level of one ion inhibits the secretion and clearance of the others.
There is a similar transport secretory system for many organic cations. A slightly
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences different transport mechanism is involved but, again, the system is fairly
nonspecific. Drugs using this pathway include:
• Atropine
• Morphine
Microbiology
• Procainamide
• Cimetidine
• Amiloride
Note that, because of competition for the carrier proteins, the concurrent
administration of organic cations can increase the plasma concentration of both
drugs to much higher levels than when the drugs are given alone.
RENAL HANDLING OF SOME IMPORTANT SOLUTES
The illustrations below represent the net transport of specific types of substances
for a normal individual on a typical Western diet (contains red meat). The dashed
lines represent the route followed by the particular substance.
Quantitative aspects are not shown. For example, in B, 20% of the substance
entering the kidney is filtered and excreted, and the remaining 80% passes through
the kidneys and back into the general circulation without processing.
Illustrations meant to show overall net
transport only
A: protein
B: inulin
C: potassium, sodium, urea
D: glucose, bicarbonate
E: PAH
F: creatinine
Figure VI2 7. Graphical Representation ofTransport
212
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 212 15/10/22 2:21P
Clinical Estimation of GFR
3#
and Patterns of Clearance
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Use knowledge of clearance as an estimator of GFR
❏ Demonstrate understanding of clearance curves for some
characteristic substances
❏ Solve problems concerning free water clearance
❏ Use knowledge of sodium and urea clearance
CLEARANCE AS AN ESTIMATOR OF GFR
Estimates of GFR are used clinically as an index of renal function and to assess the
severity and the course of renal disease. A fall in GFR means the disease is pro
gressing, whereas an increase in GFR suggests a recovery. In many cases a fall in
GFR may be the first and only clinical sign of renal dysfunction. Estimations of
GFR rely on the concept of clearance.
Substances having the following characteristics can be used to estimate GFR.
• Stable plasma concentration that is easily measured
• Freely filtered into Bowman’s space
• Not reabsorbed, secreted, synthesized, or metabolized by the kidney
Ideal substances include inulin, sucrose, and mannitol. Even though the clearance
of inulin is considered the gold standard for the measurement of GFR, it is not
used clinically. Instead clinical estimates of GFR rely on creatinine.
Creatinine is released from skeletal muscle at a constant rate proportional to
muscle mass. Muscle mass decreases with age, but GFR also normally decreases
with age. Creatinine is freely filtered and not reabsorbed by the kidney, though a
very small amount is secreted into the proximal tubule.
Creatinine production = creatinine excretion =
filtered load of creatinine = Pcr × GFR
Thus, if creatinine production remains constant, a decrease in GFR increases
plasma creatinine concentration, while an increase in GFR decreases plasma
creatinine concentration.
Plasma creatinine, however, is not a very sensitive measure of reduced GFR. It only
reveals large changes in GFR. As seen below, a significant reduction of GFR
produces only a modest elevation of plasma or serum creatinine concentration.
213
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 213 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
8
(mg/dl
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
6
Creatinine
Microbiology
4
Serum
Normal GFR
2
0
0 50 100 150
GFR (ml/min)
Figure VIIFIigure3 1V.I3Se1r.umSerum CCrereaatitninininee as Indaesx IonfdeGxFR of GFR
The only practical numerical estimate is the calculated clearance of creatinine. The
following is all that is needed:
• Plasma creatinine concentration
• Timed collection of urine and the urine concentration of creatinine
CLEARANCE CURVES FOR SOME CHARACTERISTIC
SUBSTANCES
The figure below plots clearance versus increasing plasma concentration for 4
substances. A description of each curve follows.
PAH
(ml/min)600
Clearance
200
Creatinine
100 Inulin
Glucose
Plasma Concentration (mg/dl)
Figure VI 3 2. Clearance Curves
Figure VIII 3 2. Clearance Curves
214
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 214 15/10/22 2:21PM
CHAPTER 3 | CLINICAL ESTIMATION OF GFR AND PATTERNS OF CLEARANCE
Inulin
• The clearance of inulin is independent of the plasma concentration, thus
plotting it on the graph produces a line parallel to the x axis. This is
because a rise in the plasma concentration produces a corresponding rise
in filtered load and thus a corresponding rise in ER (recall that inulin is
neither secreted nor reabsorbed). In other words, the
numerator and denominator of the clearance equation for inulin change in
proportion, leaving the quotient (clearance) unchanged.
• It is always parallel to the x axis, and the point of intersection with the
y axis is always GFR.
• If GFR increases, the line shifts upward; likewise, if GFR decreases,
the line shifts down.
Glucose
• At low plasma levels, the clearance of glucose is zero because all of
the FL is reabsorbed.
• As the plasma levels rise, the FL exceeds the TM in some nephrons and as
a result, glucose appears in the urine and thus has a clearance.
• The plasma level at which glucose first appears in the urine is called the
plasma (or renal) threshold.
• As the plasma level rises further, the clearance increases and approaches
that of inulin. The clearance never equals inulin because some glucose is
always reabsorbed.
Creatinine
• Because there is some secretion of creatinine, the clearance is always
greater than the clearance of inulin.
• However, because only a small amount is secreted, creatinine clearance
parallels inulin clearance and is independent of production rate (excretion
rises as plasma concentration increases).
• Because it is endogenously produced, it is not necessary to infuse it to get a
clearance measurement, as has to be done to measure inulin clearance.
Therefore, the clearance of creatinine is the preferred clinical method for
determining GFR (see above).
PAH
• At low plasma concentrations, the clearance equals renal plasma flow.
• As the plasma concentration rises, the carriers in some nephrons hit TM,
resulting in some PAH appearing in the renal venous plasma.
• Plasma concentrations above TM reduce the clearance of PAH (described
in chapter 2).
• As the plasma level rises further, the clearance approaches but never
equals GFR because some PAH is always secreted.
215
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 215 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Summary of the highest clearance to the lowest clearance:
PAH > creatinine > inulin > urea > sodium > glucose = albumin
Remember, if it is in the renal vein, it is not cleared. This could be because it was
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
not filtered (like albumin) or it was filtered and all reabsorbed (like glucose).
FREE WATER CLEARANCE
Microbiology
Free water clearance is the best measure of the balance between solute and water
excretion. Its use is to determine whether the kidneys are responding appropriately
to maintain normal plasma osmolality. Free water clearance is how much solute
free water is being excreted; it is as if urine consisted of plasma (with solutes) plus
or minus pure water.
• If urine osmolality is 300 mOsm/kg (isotonic urine), free water
clearance is zero.
• If plasma osmolality is too low, urine osmolality should be lower still
(positive free water clearance) in order to compensate.
• Positive free water clearance tends to cause increased plasma osmolality;
negative free water clearance causes reduced plasma osmolality.
• CH2O (+) = hypotonic urine is formed (osmolality <300 mOsm/kg)
• CH2O (−) = hypertonic urine is formed (osmolality >300 mOsm/kg)
V: urine flow rate UosmV
CH2O = V −
Posm
Uosm: urine osmolarity
Posm: plasma osmolarity
V = CH2O + Cosm
Sample Calculation
•
V = 3.0 mL/min
Uosm = 800 mOsm/L
Posm = 400 mOsm/L
CH2O = −3 mL/min
Conclusion: The kidneys are conserving water; this is appropriate compensation
for the excessive plasma osmolarity in this patient.
SODIUM AND UREA CLEARANCE
Sodium
Sodium always appears in the urine, thus sodium always has a positive clearance.
• The fractional excretion of Na+ (FENa+; equation not shown) indicates the
fraction (percentage) of the filtered Na+ that is excreted. It is very useful in
differentiating prerenal from intrarenal acute renal failure (see next
chapter).
216
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 216 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 3 | CLINICAL ESTIMATION OF GFR AND PATTERNS OF CLEARANCE
• Since almost the entire filtered load of sodium is reabsorbed, its clearance
is just above zero. Aldosterone, by increasing the reabsorption of sodium,
decreases the FeNa+. Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) increases the FeNa+
because it causes a sodium diuresis.
Urea
Urea is freely filtered but partially reabsorbed. Because some urea is always present
in the urine, you always clear a portion of the 120 mL/min filtered into Bowman’s
space.
• Since urea tends to follow the water and excretion is flow dependent, a
diuresis increases urea clearance and an antidiuresis decreases urea
clearance.
• ADH increases reabsorption of urea in the medullary collecting
duct → increase in BUN → decrease in clearance → if the plasma
concentration is increasing in the renal venous plasma, less is cleared from
the plasma.
• With a small volume of concentrated urine, the concentration of urea is
relatively high, but the excretion is less than in a diuresis that has a much
lower concentration of urea. It is the large volume in the diuresis that
increases the urea excretion and clearance.
Recall Question
Which of the following is a characteristic of inulin?
A. As the plasma levels of inulin rise, the FL exceeds the TM in
some nephrons and inulin appears in the urine
B. The clearance of inulin is the preferred clinical method for
determining RBF
C. The clearance of inulin is independent of the plasma
concentration
D. As plasma inulin rises, the clearance approaches but never
equals GFR because some inulin is always secreted
E. Inulin is reabsorbed with sodium via the renin angiotensin
aldosterone system
Answer: C
217
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 217 15/10/22 2:21P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 218 15/10/22 2:21P
4#
Regional Transport
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Solve problems concerning the proximal tubule
❏ Explain information related to loop of Henle
❏ Use knowledge of distal tubule
❏ Use knowledge of collecting duct
❏ Answer questions about renal tubular acidosis
❏ Explain information related to disorders of potassium homeostasis
❏ Demonstrate understanding of renal failure
PROXIMAL TUBULE
The fluid that enters the proximal tubule is an isotonic ultrafiltrate (300 mOsm/
kg). The concentration of a freely filtered substance in this fluid equals its plasma
concentration. The main cellular transport processes of the proximal tubular cells
can be seen below.
219
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 219 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Na+
ATP
Proximal
tubule Na+
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences lumen K+
Glucose
Glucose
Na+
Amino acid
Microbiology
Na+
Lactate Na+
ATP
HPO4–2Na+
K+
Peritubular
fluid
Na+
HCO3 – + H+
H+ HCO3 – HCO3 –
CO2
C.
A. CO2
C.A.
Organic anions
Organic cations
follow Na+
H2O, K+,
FigVurIeII V4I 14.1.TrTarnasnpsoprotrt in iPnroxiCPmrlao–lxFiimguarlTeubule Tubule
Proximal Tubule Changes
Sodium
• Approximately two thirds of the filtered sodium is reabsorbed in the
proximal tubule (PT). The basolateral Na+ K+ ATPase creates the gradient
for Na+ entry into the cell and its removal from the cell back into the
bloodstream.
• Although it can be modified some, the PT captures two thirds of the
filtered sodium (referred to as glomerulotubular balance). Recapturing
two thirds of the sodium helps protect extracellular volume despite any
changes that may occur in GFR.
• Catecholamines and angiotensin II stimulate the basolateral ATPase and
thus enhance the fraction of sodium reabsorbed in the proximal tubule.
220
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 220 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 4 | REGIONAL TRANSPORT
Water and electrolytes
• About two thirds of the filtered H2O, K+ and almost two thirds of the
filtered Cl–follow the sodium (leaky system to these substances), and the
osmolality at the end of the proximal tubule remains close to
300 mOsm/kg (isosmotic reabsorption). The chloride concentration rises
slightly through the proximal tubule because of the large percentage of
bicarbonate reabsorbed here.
• Therefore, at the end of the proximal tubule, osmolality and the concen
trations of Na+ and K+ have not changed significantly from plasma, but
only one third of the amount originally filtered remains.
Metabolites
• Normally, all of the filtered glucose is reabsorbed in the PT via secondary BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
active transport linked to sodium. This transporter is termed the sodium
SGLT 2 blocker canagliflozin inhibits
glucose linked transporter (SGLT), and type 2 (SGLT 2) is the predomi
nant form in the kidney. proximal tubule reabsorption of glucose and
is used to treat type 2 DM.
• In addition, all proteins, peptides, amino acids, and ketone bodies are
reabsorbed here via secondary active transport (requires luminal sodium,
linked to sodium reabsorption).
• Therefore, the concentration of the above should be zero in the tubular
fluid leaving the proximal tubule (clearance is zero).
Bicarbonate
About 80% of the filtered bicarbonate is reabsorbed here. The mechanism for this
reabsorption is as follows:
• Bicarbonate combines with free H+ in lumen and is converted into CO2
and H2O, catalyzed by the luminal carbonic anhydrase enzyme (CA). H+
is pumped into the lumen in exchange with sodium (antiporter). Although
not pictured, there is a H+ ATPase on the luminal membrane that
contributes to pumping H+ into the lumen.
• CO2, being very soluble, crosses the luminal membrane where it combines
with water to reform H+ and bicarbonate (note CA in the cell). The H+ is
then pumped back into the lumen, while bicarbonate exits the basolateral
membrane to complete its reabsorption.
• Because of this mechanism, bicarbonate reabsorption is dependent upon
H+ secretion and the activity of CA.
• The most important factor for H+ secretion is the concentration of H+ in BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
the cell. Thus, H+ secretion and bicarbonate reabsorption are increased
The primary site of action for carbonic
during an acidosis and they decrease with an alkalosis.
anhydrase inhibitors is the PT. Blocking CA
• Angiotensin II stimulates the Na+ H+ antiporter. Thus, in volume depleted
reduces bicarbonate reabsorption and the
states, the amount of bicarbonate reabsorption in the PT increases. This is
activity of the Na+ H+ exchanger.
thought to be the mechanism preventing bicarbonate loss when a patient
develops a contraction alkalosis.
The small amount of bicarbonate that leaves the proximal tubule is normally
reabsorbed in subsequent segments.
221
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 221 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
CLINICAL CORRELATE Urate (uric acid)
An 85 year old woman presents to the The details of the renal handling of urate are too complex for the scope of this
emergency room with confusion. She is on book. In short:
Pathologhyydrochlorothiazide. HerBebhiacvairobroanSlactieence/SociiaSslci3en4ces
• Urate is formed by the breakdown of nucleotides
mEq/L (normal 24 mEq/L). What is the
• Xanthine oxidase is the enzyme that catalyzes the final reaction to form
cause of the metabolic alkalosis?
urate.
This is a “contraction alkalosis.” The thiazide • About 90% of the filtered urate is reabsorbed by the proximal tubule.
Microbiology
diuretic is causing a decrease in the
• If the filtered load (FL) of urate is high enough and the luminal pH is low,
intravascular volume. You can see the same then more of the urate exists as uric acid, which can precipitate/form a
in sweating in the desert or vomiting (not kidney stone (not the most common type of kidney stone but seen in
diarrhea because you lose bicarbonate in patients with gout).
the stools and get a metabolic acidosis). The
low volume state increases renin secretion,
Secretion
leading to high angiotensin II. Angiotensin II
The proximal tubule is where many organic anions and cations are secreted and
activates the sodium/hydrogen exchanger cleared from the circulation including PAH, penicillin, urate, and morphine.
→ increasing the reabsorption of
bicarbonate → maintaining the metabolic
alkalosis. Energy requirements
Notice above that all of the active processes are powered by the Na/K ATPase
primary active pump. This pump is located in the proximal tubule basal and
CLINICAL CORRELATE basolateral borders and is directly or indirectly responsible for most of the water
and electrolyte reabsorption in the nephron. It thus represents the most energy
Administration of a solute that is freely
demanding process of the nephron.
filtered but not reabsorbed (mannitol) and/
or reducing/preventing the normal The figure below depicts the ratio of the concentration of the substance in the
reabsorption of a solute results in the proximal tubular fluid (TF) to the concentration in the plasma (P), beginning in
Bowman’s space through the end of the PT.
osmotic pull of water into the lumen and
diuresis occurs. From the standpoint of the
PT, glucose exceeding the TM is an important
example.
5.0
A: PAH
A= PAH
4.0
B: inulin B= Inulin
B C= Substance reabsorbed som
C: substance reabsorbed somewhat less TF 3.0 A rapidly than water, e.g., ch
rapidly than water, e.g., chloride D= Major electrolytes such as
P
2.0 E= Substance reabsorbed som
D: major electrolytes such as sodium, C rapidly than water
potassium D F= Substance completely reab
1.0 proximal tubule, e.g., gluco
E: substance reabsorbed somewhat more E
F
rapidly than water 0.0
Percent length of
F: substance completely reabsorbed in proximal tubule
Beginning of End of
proximal tubule, e.g., glucose
proximal tubule proximal tubule
Figure FigurVeIIIVI4422.. PPrrooxxiimmaall TubTuulebuleTranspoTrrtansport
222
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 222 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 4 | REGIONAL TRANSPORT
Concentration of Inulin in the Nephron Tubule CLINICAL CORRELATE
The concentration of inulin along the nephron tubule is an index of water For a patient who has diarrhea, vomiting, or
reabsorption. hemorrhaging, it is important to preserve
• Inulin is freely filtered; thus, its concentration in Bowman’s space is the extracellular volume; one way to do so is to
same as it is in the plasma. Because water is reabsorbed but inulin is not, increase reabsorption of fluid and
the concentration of inulin increases throughout the nephron. The greater
electrolytes at the proximal tubules.
the water reabsorption, the greater the increase in inulin concentration.
• Since two thirds of the water is reabsorbed in the proximal tubule, the
inulin concentration should triple TF/P = 3.0. Its concentration should
further increase in the descending limb of the loop of Henle, distal tubule,
and the collecting duct (assuming ADH is present).
• The segment of the nephron with the highest concentration of inulin is the
terminal collecting duct. The segment of the nephron with the lowest
concentration of inulin is Bowman’s space.
LOOP OF HENLE
Fluid entering the loop of Henle is isotonic (300 mOsm/kg), but the volume is only
one third the volume originally filtered into Bowman’s space.
• The loop of Henle has countercurrent flow and it acts as a countercurrent
multiplier, the details of which are not imperative to learn. In short, the
loop of Henle creates a concentrated medullary interstitium.
• The osmolality of the medulla can reach a maximum of about
1200 mOsm/kg, and the predominant osmoles are NaCl and urea (see
Figure VI 4 3).
• Juxtamedullary nephrons are responsible for this extremely high medullary
osmolality. They are surrounded by vasa recta and slow flow in the vasa
recta is crucial for maintaining the concentrated medullary interstitium.
NOTE
Three things are required to maintain this
Urea
Cortex
concentrated medullary interstitium:
300
300 100
H2O • Slow flow in vasa recta
300
Na+ Na+ H2O
• Activity of Na+ K+ 2Cl transporter
Outer 2Cl–1K+ K+
medulla NaCl (NKCC2)
600 H2O 2Cl–600 Urea • Urea permeability in collecting duct
600 400
NaCl
H2O Medullary
collecting
Urea NaCl H2O tubule
Inner NaCl NaCl Urea
medulla
Urea
1200
1200
1200
NaCl Loop of Henle
100 –1200
Urea
Figure FVigIuIrIe 4VI3.4 C3o.unCtoerucnutrerrecnutrrent aanndd thetheLooLpoopof HeonfleHenle
223
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 223 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Descending Limb
• Permeable to water (about 15% of filtered water is reabsorbed here)
• Relatively impermeable to solute
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Ascending Limb
• Impermeable to water
Microbiology • Solutes transported out
A typical cell in the ascending thick limb (ATL) of the loop of Henle can be seen
below. Similar to the PT, there is a luminal Na+ H+ antiporter and bicarbonate is
reabsorbed here.
Na+ K+ 2Cl transporter (NKCC2)
This is an electroneutral transport resulting in the reabsorption of about 25% of
the filtered sodium, chloride, and potassium.
• The luminal membrane contains a K+ channel (Figure VI 4 4),
allowing diffusion of this ion back into lumen (recall that the
BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY concentration of K+ inside cells is very high compared to the
Loop diuretics block the Na+ K+ 2Cl extracellular concentration).
transporter in ATL, thereby reducing their • This back diffusion of K+ into the lumen creates a positive luminal
reabsorption. Blocking this transporter also potential, which in turn, promotes calcium and magnesium reabsorption
reduces calcium and magnesium (about 25% of FL) via a paracellular pathway (primarily). This positive
luminal potential also causes sodium reabsorption via a paracellular
reabsorption, all of which results in a
pathway.
marked diuresis.
Calcium sensing receptor (CaSR)
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY
The basolateral membrane of cells in ATL contains the CaSR (Figure VI 4 4),
Bartter syndrome is a genetic mutation which is a G protein coupled receptor. Because it is on the basolateral membrane,
resulting in diminished function of the Na+ CaSR is influenced by the plasma concentration of calcium.
K+ 2Cl transporter in ATL. This leads to a low
• CaSR couples to at least two G proteins: 1) GI/O, which inhibits adenylyl
volume state, which causes an increase in
cyclase, thereby reducing intracellular cAMP, and 2) Gq, which activates
renin and aldosterone (known as a
protein kinase C (PKC). The net effect of these changes in intracellular
secondary hyperaldosteronism). Patients signaling pathways is an inhibition of the Na+ K+ 2Cl transporter.
exhibit hypokalemia, alkalosis, and elevated
• Reducing the activity of the Na+ K+ 2Cl transporter reduces the positive
urine calcium.
luminal potential (less K+ back diffusion), which in turn, decreases
calcium reabsorption.
• Thus, high plasma concentrations of calcium can directly reduce calcium
reabsorption in ATL.
224
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 224 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 4 | REGIONAL TRANSPORT
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY
Tubular fluid Peritubular fluid
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (FHH)
is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder
resulting in hypercalcemia.
CO2
• The CaSR is mutated such that it does
(C.A.) HCO3 –
H+ not respond to plasma calcium; the
CaSR is inactive and “fooled” into
Na+
thinking that the plasma calcium is
Cl–K+
low when it is in fact elevated.
Na+ Na+
Na+ Na+ • Thus, calcium reabsorption in the
ATP
K+ K+ kidney is elevated despite the
2Cl–K+ K+
Inhibit hypercalcemia.
+
+ 2Cl–Gq & Gi/o • Patients also have high levels of
Ca2+
K+
parathyroid hormone (PTH) because
+ CaSR
Ca2+ CaSR is expressed in cells of the
Mg2+ parathyroid gland. The mutation
prevents the inhibition of PTH that
normally occurs in response to
Figure VI 4 4. Loop of Henle
Figure VIII 4 4. Loop of Henle hypercalcemia.
Recall Question
In which part of the nephron isampicillin most likely to be secreted
and cleared from the circulation?
A. Proximal tubule
B. Descending limb of loop of Henle
C. Ascending limb of loop of Henle
D. Distal tubule
E. Collecting duct
Answer: A
DISTAL TUBULE
The early distal tubule reabsorbs Na+, Cl ,and Ca2+.
NaCl
NaCl crosses the apical membrane via a Na+ Cl symporter.
• The Na+ is pumped across the basal membrane via the Na/K ATPase
proteins and Cl diffuses down its electrochemical gradient through
channels.
• This section is impermeable to water. Thus, osmolality decreases further.
In fact, the ultrafiltrate in the early distal tubule has the lowest osmolality
of the entire nephron.
225
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 225 15/10/22 2:21PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Calcium
Calcium enters the cell from the luminal fluid passively through calcium
channels. The opening of these channels is primarily regulated by parathyroid
hormone (PTH).
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY • Calcium is actively extruded into the peritubular fluid via Ca2+ ATPase or
a 3Na+ Ca2+ antiporter.
Thiazide diuretics block the NaCl symporter
• These cells also express the calcium binding protein, calbindin, which
in the distal tubule. Blocking this transporter
Microbiology facilitates calcium reabsorption. Calbindin synthesis is increased by the
enhances calcium reabsorption in the distal
active form of vitamin D, and thus vitamin D enhances PTH’s action on
tubule and can result in hypercalcemia. In
the distal tubule.
addition, thiazide diuretics are sometimes
used to increase plasma calcium.
Lumen
Capillary
Epithelial (kidney) cell
Cl–Na+ Na+ Na+ Na+
ATP
K+ K+
Ca2+
Cl–PTH
Cal: calbindin ATP
Ca2+
Ca2+
3Na+ 3Na+
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGYCal: calbindin Ca2+ Cal Ca2+
Gitelman syndrome is a genetic disorder Ca2+
resulting in a mutated (reduced function)
1,25
NaCl transporter. Patients are hypokalemic,
Dihydroxy
alkalotic, and have a low urine calcium.
Figure VI4 5. Transporters in Distal Tubule
Figure VIII 4 5. Transporters in Distal Tubule
COLLECTING DUCT
The collecting duct (CD) is composed of principal cells and intercalated cells.
Principal Cells
• The luminal membrane of principal cells contains sodium channels,
commonly referred to as epithelial Na+ channels (ENaC). Because of these
channels, sodium follows its electrochemical gradient (created by the
basolateral Na+ K+ ATPase) into the cell.
• Some chloride does not follow the sodium, thus the reabsorption of
sodium produces a negative luminal potential. This negative luminal
potential causes potassium secretion.
• Thus, the reabsorption of sodium and secretion of potassium are
linked.
226
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 226 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 4 | REGIONAL TRANSPORT
• Mineralocorticoids such as aldosterone exert an important effect on these
cells. Activation of the mineralocorticoid receptor increases the number of
luminal ENaC channels, increases their open time, and induces synthesis
and trafficking of the basolateral Na+–K+ ATPase. The net effect is
increased sodium reabsorption and potassium secretion.
• Principal cells express aquaporins, and their insertion into the luminal
membrane is regulated by ADH (or AVP). ADH acts on V2
(Gs—cAMP) receptors to cause insertion of aquaporins, which in turn,
causes water (and urea) reabsorption.
BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
Lumen of kidney tubule Interstitial space
Potassium sparing diuretics work by blocking
AAldosterone
++ + ENaC, e.g., amiloride, or by blocking
aldosterone receptors, e.g., spironolactone,
NNaa++ NNNaa+ Na++ or the production of aldosterone, e.g.,
blockers of the RAAS system. Because
UUrrreeaeaa ATP
KK+ K+ sodium reabsorption is reduced, potassium
secretion is diminished.
HH22OO ++
HH22O HHiiggh
oosssmmmolality
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY
++
Liddle syndrome is a genetic disorder
c A M P
resulting in a gain of function of ENaC
K+ GS
V2
channels in the CD. This results in enhanced
ADH
sodium reabsorption and potassium
(AVP)
secretion. Patients are hypertensive,
hypokalemic, and alkalotic.
Figure V 4 6. Principal Cell
Figure VI4 6. Principal Cell
Intercalated Cells CLINICAL CORRELATE
• Intercalated cells are intimately involved in acid base regulation. The
A65 year old man presents with
amount of fixed acid generated by an individual is mainly determined by
hyponatremia. His serum osmolarity is low
diet. A high percentage of animal protein in the diet generates more fixed
and urine osmolarity high. He is diagnosed
acid than a vegetarian based diet.
with SIADH. He is started on fluid restriction
• The luminal membrane contains a H+–ATPase, which pumps H+ into the
but is not able to comply. He is started on a
lumen. Although free H+ is pumped into the lumen, luminal pH can only
loop diuretic, and plasma sodium increases.
go so low before it causes damage to cells, and thus most of the H+ is
eliminated from the body via buffers, phosphate and ammonia being the
Loop diuretics decrease the reabsorption of
two most common.
sodium and chloride at the loop of Henle.
• Monoprotonated phosphate is freely filtered at the glomerulus. About 80%
This removes the concentrating effect of the
is reabsorbed in the PT and another 10% is reabsorbed in the distal tubule.
loop of Henle, decreasing the osmolar
The remaining phosphate serves as a buffer for the secreted H+. The H+
gradient. This, in turn, decreases the
pumped into the lumen binds to phosphate to form diprotonated phos
phate, which is poorly reabsorbed, thus eliminating H+ from the body. reabsorption for free water from the CD.
Phosphate is the primary titratable acid.
227
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 227 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
CLINICAL CORRELATE • In addition, the H+ pumped into the lumen can combine with ammonia to
form ammonium, which is not reabsorbed and is thus excreted. Ammonia
In nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (DI), ADH
is produced by the catabolism of glutamine and this occurs in cells of the
receptors are not functioning and it is not
PT. Ammonia synthesis and secretion in the proximal tubule increases in
Pathologpyossible to increase reabBsoerhpatvioionraSlciencea/tSoctihaSelcienCcDes. response to an acidosis and decreases in response to an alkalosis in
The patient loses free water and develops proximal tubule cells.
hypernatremia. Treatment is reduction of • For every H+ excreted by the above buffers, bicarbonate is added to the
extracellular volume with a thiazide diuretic. body (new bicarbonate).
MicrobioloTghyis increases peritubular oncotic pressure, • Aldosterone stimulates the H+ ATPase of intercalated cells. Thus, excess
in turn increasing water reabsorption in the aldosterone results in a metabolic alkalosis.
proximal tubule. The elevated water
• The luminal membrane has a H+ K+ exchanger. If K+ is high in the lumen,
reabsorption, along with sodium loss in the this transport is increased. The resulting excess H+ secretion can produce
urine (action of thiazide diuretics), corrects an alkalosis. This may be the mechanism for the alkalosis seen in Liddle’s
the hypernatremia syndrome.
• The number of principal cells far exceeds the number of intercalated cells,
so it is important to appreciate that the kidneys are typically excreting K+
on a net basis. Under conditions in which K+ retention is needed, however,
intercalated cells can reabsorb K+.
Lumen of kidney tubule Interstitial space
K+ K+ K+
AATTPP
HPO2 – = H+ H+
H+
H+ H+
H2PO4 – ATP ((””NNeeww” bbiiccaarrbboonnate)na
NHH33 H+ HHHCCO3CO – HHCCO3O –
ClCl– ClCl–
NH4 + Carbonic Anhydrase rraase
H2O + CO2
Excreted in urine
Figure VI 4 7. Alpha Intercalated Cell
Figure VI 4 7. Alpha Intercalated Cell
228
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 228 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 4 | REGIONAL TRANSPORT
RENAL TUBULAR ACIDOSIS
Proximal Renal Tubular Acidosis (Type II)
Proximal renal tubular acidosis (type II) is the result of a diminished capacity of
the proximal tubule to reabsorb bicarbonate.
• Transient appearance of bicarbonate in the urine until the filtered load is
reduced to match the reduced capacity of reabsorption.
• Steady state characterized by a low plasma bicarbonate and acid urine.
• An example would be Fanconi syndrome, which involves a general defect
in the proximal tubular transport processes and carbonic anhydrase
inhibitors.
• Serum potassium is also low. When bicarbonate is lost in the urine, it is
lost as sodium bicarbonate and that pulls water with it creating an osmotic
diuresis. The diuresis leads to loss of potassium in the urine.
Distal Renal Tubular Acidosis (Type I)
Distal renal tubular acidosis (type I) is the result of an inability of the distal
nephron to secrete and excrete fixed acid, thus an inability to form an acid urine.
Urine pH >5.5 – 6.0.
• Mechanisms would include impairment of the transport systems for
hydrogen ions and bicarbonate and an increased permeability of the
luminal membrane allowing the back diffusion of the hydrogen ions from
the tubular lumen.
• The result is a metabolic acidosis with an inappropriately high
urine pH.
• Serum potassium is also low.
Causes include autoimmune disorders (e.g., lupus, sarcoidosis, Sjogren); lithium;
and hypercalciuric conditions (calcium damaging cells).
Renal Tubular Acidosis Type IV: Hypoaldosterone States NOTE
Renal tubular acidosis type IV is the result of an inability to secrete potassium, Although H+ secretion into the lumen is
leading to hyperkalemia. There is decreased secretion of protons, leading to reduced, urine pH is acidic. The reason
metabolic acidosis.
relates to the hyperkalemia. High
Causes: extracellular K+pulls H+ out of the proximal
tubule cells, causing diminished ammonia
• Diabetic nephropathy, due to low renin secretion with loss of kidney
production. Because ammonia is an
function
important buffer for tubular fluid, its loss
• Any drug that inhibits the RAAS system, such as ACE inhibitors, ARBs, results in an acidic urine despite diminished
spironolactone, and aliskiren
H+ secretion.
• Trimethoprim
• Addison disease due to loss of aldosterone secretion from the adrenal
cortex
229
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 229 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
DISORDERS OF POTASSIUM HOMEOSTASIS
Potassium Balance
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
To keep the body amount constant, excretion of potassium must match dietary
intake, and the kidneys regulate potassium excretion. A small percentage of
ingested potassium is lost in the stool but this is not a major regulatory route
under normal conditions.
Microbiology
ICF ECF
The large conce
3Na+ Na+ due to membra
membrane perm
2K+
K+
Figure VI4 8. ICF and ECF Potassium Distribution
Figure VIII 4 7. ICF and ECF Potassium Distribution
• 98% of potassium inside cells
• 2% of potassium in ECF (4 mEq/L)
• >5.0 mEq/L = hyperkalemia
• <3.5 mEq/L = hypokalemia
• Insulin and epinephrine stimulate the Na/K ATPase and can thus reduce
plasma potassium.
• Long term balance is maintained via aldosterone’s effect on potassium
secretion in the distal tubule and CDs of the nephrons.
• Acidosis and increased ECF osmolality (cell shrinkage) shifts potassium
from the ICF to the ECF. Inorganic fixed acid > organic acids > respira
tory acidosis
• Alkalosis and decreased ECF osmolality (cell swelling) shifts potassium
from the ECF to the ICF. Metabolic alkalosis > respiratory alkalosis
Potassium secretion and excretion by the kidney
Potassium secretion is determined mainly by 2 factors: filtrate flow and sodium
reabsorption (creates negative potential of the lumen).
• Increased flow and/or aldosterone increases potassium secretion and
excretion
• Decreased flow and/or aldosterone decreases potassium secretion and
excretion
230
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 230 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 4 | REGIONAL TRANSPORT
Luminal Basal
membrane membrane
Aldosterone
Principal
Na+ Na+ ATPase cell
Na+
K+ K+
ECF
H+ H+ HCO3 – HCO3 –
Intercalated
Carbonic Anhydrase
cell
Filtrate H2O + CO2
Figure VI 4 9. Late Distal Tubule and Collecting Duct
Figure VIII 4 8. Late Distal Tubule and Collecting Duct
Acid Base Disorders
Acidosis shifts potassium from the ICF to ECF. Decreased intracellular potassium
reduces the potassium gradient, thus potassium secretion falls (both promote
hyperkalemia).
The negative potassium balance in acidosis is not typically sustained, however,
because hyperkalemia stimulates aldosterone.
Alkalosis shifts potassium from ECF to ICF. Increased intracellular potassium
increases potassium secretion (both promote hypokalemia).
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Summary of Potassium Balance
A55 year old woman with a history of end
stage renal failure presents with confusion
Promoters of hyperkalemia
after missing adialysis session. Her
• Transcellular shifts: metabolic acidosis, hyperglycemia, insulin deficiency
potassium is elevated. While waiting for the
or resistance, muscle trauma
nurse to set up the dialysis, the patient is
• GI: excessive intake (on rare occasions) treated with an injection of bicarbonate and
• Kidney: acute oliguric kidney disease, chronic kidney disease where GFR insulin with dextrose.
decreases dramatically from normal, hypoaldosteronism
Giving bicarbonate gives the patient an
alkalosis. This causes protons to leave the
Consequences of hyperkalemia intracellular space down its concentration
• Neuromuscular function: muscle weakness, general fatigue if chronic gradient. To maintain electroneutrality,
• Cardiac: high T wave, eventually in severe hyperkalemia ventricular potassium shifts into cells. This decreases
fibrillation the extracellular potassium concentration.
• Metabolic: metabolic acidosis Insulin activates the sodium/potassium
ATPase and that increases the shift of
potassium into the cell also.
231
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 231 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Promoters of hypokalemia
• Transcellular shifts: metabolic alkalosis, sudden increases in insulin and
catecholamines
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences • GI: diarrhea, vomiting, low potassium diet (rarely has an effect on
its own)
• Kidney: diuretics due to increased flow (thiazides, loop diuretics, osmotic
diuresis), hyperaldosteronism (adrenal adenoma, renal arterial stenosis),
Microbiology increased excretion of negative ions (bicarbonate, ketone bodies), renal
tubular acidosis types I and II
Consequences of hypokalemia
• Neuromuscular function: muscle weakness, general fatigue
• Cardiac: hyperpolarization affects excitability and delays
repolarization.
• EKG effects: low T wave, high U wave
• Metabolic: decreased insulin response to carbohydrate load, decreased
growth rate in children, nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, metabolic
alkalosis
RENAL FAILURE
Acute Renal Failure
Acute renal failure (also called acute kidney injury/failure) is a rapid loss of renal
function that is often reversible. Loss of renal function results in the accumulation
of waste products that the kidney excretes, e.g., BUN and creatinine. Depending
upon the cause, the fractional excretion of Na+ (FeNa+) is either elevated or
reduced. As its name implies, FeNa+ simply means the % of filtered Na+ that is
excreted: the higher the number, the less reabsorption and vice versa. The causes of
acute renal failure are as follows.
Prerenal
With prerenal renal failure, there is decreased renal perfusion as would occur with
a decreased renal perfusion pressure, e.g., hypovolemia of hemorrhage, diarrhea,
vomiting; congestive heart failure. Initially, there is no renal injury and it is
reversible if corrected early. Characteristic signs are as follows:
• Reduced GFR
• Reduced FeNa+: tubular function is intact, and the low GFR (reduced
filtered load) allows for significant reabsorption
• Na+ reabsorption: Ang II and catecholamines are often elevated, both of
which increase Na+ reabsorption
• Elevated plasma BUN:Cr: both are elevated, yet BUN is elevated more
significantly than creatinine due to high reabsorption of urea (water
reabsorption is elevated in prerenal)
232
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 232 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 4 | REGIONAL TRANSPORT
Intrarenal
In this condition, tubular damage occurs resulting in tubular dysfunction. Toxins,
interstitial nephritis, ischemia, rhabdomyolysis, and sepsis are factors that can
cause acute tubular necrosis and intrarenal failure. Characteristic signs are as
follows:
• Increased FeNa+: tubules are damaged and thus unable to reabsorb Na+
• Casts/cells in the urine: damaged cells are sloughed off into tubule
• Low plasma BUN:Cr: tubular damage prevents reabsorption of urea
Postrenal
This condition is caused by obstruction of fluid outflow from the kidney, e.g., renal
calculi, enlarged prostate.
• Early: characteristics are similar to prerenal, i.e., reduced FeNa+, elevated
plasma BUN:Cr
• Late: buildup of pressure results in tubular damage, resulting in character
istics of intrarenal failure, i.e., marked increase in FeNa+, low plasma
BUN:Cr
Chronic Renal Failure
Although nephrons often recover from the sloughing of the tubular epithelial cells
in acute renal failure, in chronic renal failure there is an irreversible loss of
nephrons. To compensate, the remaining nephrons have an increased glomerular
capillary pressure and hyperfiltration.
One way to look at this is a “hypertension” at the level of the nephron; the
hyperfiltration combined with the increased work load promotes further injury
leading to fibrosis, scarring, and loss of additional nephrons.
Looking back at the function of the kidney and how it regulates a variety of
physiologic variables, many of the consequences of chronic renal failure are
predictable.
• Inability to excrete waste products leads to a rise in plasma BUN and
creatinine
• Inability to regulate sodium and water; can lead to hyponatremia, volume
overload, and thus edema (in addition, patients are susceptible to rapid
development of hypernatremia and volume depletion following vomiting
and diarrhea)
• Inability to regulate potassium excretion leads to hyperkalemia
• Inability to excrete fixed acids leads to metabolic acidosis (elevated anion
gap—see next chapter)
• Inability to excrete phosphate leads to hyperphosphatemia, which reduces
plasma calcium and increases PTH (secondary hyperparathyroidism);
result is increased bone resorption (renal osteodystrophy)
233
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 233 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
• Inability to hydroxylate (1 alpha hydroxylase enzyme is in the kidney)
25,OH cholecalciferol decreases circulating levels of active vitamin D,
which contributes to the hypocalcemia
• Inability to secrete erythropoietin results in anemia
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
The most common cause of chronic renal failure is the nephropathy produced by
diabetes. The second most common cause is hypertension.
Microbiology
Recall Question
Which of the following medications causes an intracellular shift
of potassium?
A. IV dextrose
B. IVinsulin
C. Propranolol
D. Acetazolamide
E. Digoxin
Answer: B
234
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 234 15/10/22 2:21P
5#
Acid–Base Regulation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Interpret scenarios on buffering systems
❏ Explain information related to formulating a diagnosis
❏ Explain information related to 3 question method
❏ Solve problems concerning the 4 primary disturbances
❏ Use knowledge of compensation
❏ Solve problems concerning plasma anion gap diagnosis
❏ Use knowledge of graphical representation (Davenport plot)
BUFFERING SYSTEMS
The CO2 bicarbonate buffer system is one of the major buffer systems of the
blood.
CA
–
H2O + CO2 H2CO3 H+ + HCO3
FigureFigureIXVI151.1.PProrodduucctitoionn ofoCfarbCoanribconicAcid Acid
To demonstrate the changes in the major variables during acid–base disturbances,
the scheme can be simplified to the following:
–
CO2 H+ + HCO3
Recall that the respiratory system plays the key role in regulating CO2, while the
kidneys are the long term regulators of H+ and HCO3 –. Thus, these 2 organ
systems are paramount in the discussion of acid base regulation.
FORMULATING A DIAGNOSIS
Acid base disturbances can be diagnosed from arterial blood gases (ABGs)
using a 3 question method. Given that arterial blood is the source for the
diagnostic data, one is actually determining an acidemia or alkalemia. However,
235
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 235 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
an acidemia or alkalemia is typically indicative of an underlying acidosis or
alkalosis, respectively.
An overview of this approach is provided here to lay the framework for remainder
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences of the chapter.
Three Question Method
Microbiology
Question 1: What is the osis?
• If pH <7.35, then acidosis
• If pH >7.45, then alkalosis
The normal value of pH is 7.4, with the normal range 7.35–7.45, thus the basis of
the numbers above. However, one can have an underlying acid base disorder even
though pH is in the normal range.
Question 2: What is the cause of the osis?
To answer this, one looks at bicarbonate next. In the section below, we will go into
more detail.
Question 3: Was there compensation?
A calculation must be performed to answer this final question, and this will be
covered in detail below. However, bear in mind the following:
• For respiratory disturbances, the kidneys alter total bicarbonate; whether
or not compensation has occurred is based upon the patient’s measured
bicarbonate versus a calculated value of bicarbonate.
• The respiratory system responds quickly and it is important to determine
if it has responded appropriately; respiratory compensation compares the
patient’s measured PCO2 versus a calculated (predicted) value.
The 4 Primary Disturbances
There are 4 primary acid base disturbances, each of which results in an altered
concentration of H+. The basic deviations from normal can be an acidosis (excess
H+) or an alkalosis (deficiency of H+), either of which may be caused by a respira
tory or metabolic problem.
• Respiratory acidosis: too much CO2
• Metabolic acidosis: addition of H+ (not of CO2 origin) and/or loss
of bicarbonate from the body
• Respiratory alkalosis: not enough CO2
• Metabolic alkalosis: loss of H+ (not of CO2 origin) and/or addition
of base to the body
236
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 236 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 5 | ACID–BASE REGULATION
The “gold standard” values for arterial blood are as follows:
pH = 7.4
HCO3 – = 24 mEq/L
PCO2 = 40 mm Hg
Follow the bicarbonate trail
Question 2 asks for the cause of the osis. To answer this, look at the bicarbonate
concentration and remember the basic CO2–bicarbonate reaction, applying mass
action. The table below shows the 4 primary disturbances with the resultant
bicarbonate changes.
CO2 ↔ H+ + HCO3 –
–
Table VI 5 1. Acute Changes in pH/HCO3
pH HCO3 –
Respiratory acidosis ↓ ↑
Metabolic acidosis ↓ ↓↓
Respiratory alkalosis ↑ ↓
Metabolic alkalosis ↑ ↑↑
Respiratory acidosis is characterized by too much CO2.
• Increasing CO2 drives the reaction to the right, thereby increasing HCO3 –.
• For every 1 mm Hg rise in PaCO2, there is a 0.1 mEq/L increase in
HCO3 – as a result of the chemical reaction.
• Thus, there is a 1 :0.1 ratio of CO2 increase to HCO3 – increase for an
acute (uncompensated) respiratory acidosis.
Metabolic acidosis causes a marked decrease in HCO3 – because the addition of
H+ consumes bicarbonate (drives reaction to the left).
• Alternatively, the acidosis could be caused by loss of base (HCO3 –).
Respiratory alkalosis is characterized by a reduced CO2.
• Decreasing CO2 drives the reaction to the left, thereby reducing HCO3 –.
• For every 1 mm Hg fall in PaCO2, there is a 0.2 mEq/L decrease in
HCO3 – as a result of the chemical reaction.
• Thus, there is a 1 :0.2 ratio of CO2 decrease to HCO3 – decrease for an
acute (uncompensated) respiratory alkalosis.
Metabolic alkalosis causes arise in HCO3 – because the loss of H+ drives the
reaction to the right.
• Alternatively, an alkalosis can be caused by addition of base (bicarbonate)
to the body.
237
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 237 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
NOTE COMPENSATION
pH can be used instead of bicarbonate to
determine if a respiratory disturbance is Respiratory Acidosis
Pathologaycute or chronic (see enBdehavoiforacSlhcaipetnecre/SociaSlciences The kidneys compensate by increasing HCO3 – and eliminating H+, but the kidneys
Supplemental Information). take days to fully compensate.
• For every 1 mm Hg increase in PaCO2, HCO3 – increases 0.35 mEq/L as a
result of kidney compensation. Thus, there is a 1:0.35 ratio of CO2
Microbiology increase to HCO3 – increase in a chronic (compensated) respiratory
acidosis.
Metabolic Acidosis
Metabolic acidosis is characterized by low pH and HCO3 –. The drop in pH
stimulates ventilation via peripheral chemoreceptors, thus the respiratory system
provides the first, rapid compensatory response.
• Winter’s equation is used to determine if the respiratory response is
adequate.
Predicted PaCO2 = (1.5 × HCO3 –) + 8
• The patient’s PaCO2 should be within 2(±) of this predicted value, and if
so, then respiratory compensation has occurred.
Respiratory Alkalosis
The kidneys compensate by eliminating HCO3 – and conserving H+, but the
kidneys take days to fully compensate.
• For every 1 mm Hg drop in PaCO2, HCO3 – decreases 0.5 mEq/L as a
result of kidney compensation. Thus, there is a 1:0.5 ratio of CO2 decrease
to HCO3 – decrease in a chronic (compensated) respiratory alkalosis.
• The maximum low for HCO3 – is 15 mEq/L.
Metabolic Alkalosis
Similar to a metabolic acidosis, the respiratory system is the first line compensa
tory mechanism.
Ventilation decreases to retain CO2.
• The following equation is used to determine if compensation occurred. It
computes the PaCO2, which denotes appropriate compensation.
Expected PaCO2 = (0.7 × rise in HCO3 –) + 40
• The patient’s PaCO2 should be within 2(±) of the computed value, but
should not exceed 55 mm Hg. The 40 represents the normal PaCO2
(see above).
238
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 238 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 5 | ACID–BASE REGULATION
Additional Important Points
• The body never overcompensates. If it appears that a patient
“overcompensated” for a primary disorder, there is likely a second disor
der.
• If CO2 and HCO3 – go in opposite directions, there is a combined distur
bance—either a combined (mixed) respiratory and metabolic acidosis or a
combined (mixed) respiratory and metabolic alkalosis.
• Although the opposite direction rule is true, do not presume that it is
required for someone to have a combined disturbance, i.e., a combined
disturbance can still exist even if CO2 and HCO3 – go in the same direc
tion.
• Too much CO2 is a respiratory acidosis.
• Too little CO2 is a respiratory alkalosis.
PLASMA ANION GAP (PAG)
The total cation charges in the plasma always equal the total anion charges present.
However, only major ions are typically measured in a blood sample, and an “anion
gap” can be determined.
Cations are estimated as the plasma concentration of the major cation, Na+. It is
not usually the case, but some clinicians also include K+ (normal K+ is 4 mEq/L
and if included, then adjust the normal gap accordingly, i.e., add 4).
Anions are estimated as the plasma Cl–and HCO3 –.
PAG = Na+ – (Cl–+ HCO3 –)
PAG NORMAL VALUES:
Na+: 140 mEq/L
Cl–: 104 mEq/L
HCO3 –
HCO3 –: 24 mEq/L
Cl––) PAG: Na+ – (Cl–+ HCO3
PAG: 12 ± 2
Na+
Cation Anions
Figure IXFigu1re 2.VIP5AG2. PAG
239
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 239 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
The anion gap is useful in differentiating the cause of a metabolic acidosis. In most
cases, the anion gap increases when the underlying cause involves an organic acid
(unmeasured charge is conjugate base of the acid). When the acidosis is the result
of bicarbonate loss, e.g., diarrhea, then chloride typically increases resulting in no
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences change in the anion gap.
The more common causes of an elevated and non elevated gap can be remembered
using the mnemonics provided below.
Microbiology Use the following pneumonics to remember elevated and non elevated gap
metabolic acidoses:
MUDPILES (elevated gap) HARDUP (non elevated gap)
M: Methanol H: Hyperchloremia (parenteral
nutrition)
U: Uremia (kidney failure)
A: Acetazolamide
D: Diabetic ketoacidosis
R: Renal tubular acidosis
P: Paraldehyde
D: Diarrhea
I: Iron; Isoniazid
U: Ureteral diversion
L: Lactic acidosis
P: Pancreatic fistula
E: Ethylene glycol; ethanol
ketoacidosis
S: Salicylates; starvation
ketoacidosis; sepsis
DIAGNOSIS
Now that we have discussed how the basic reaction responds to respiratory and
metabolic disturbances and how the body compensates, let’s use the 3 questions to
quickly determine acid base abnormalities.
Question 1: What is the osis?
As indicated above, look at pH.
• If pH <7.35, then it’s acidosis.
• If pH >7.45, then it’s alkalosis.
Question 2: What is the cause of the osis?
Follow the bicarbonate trail.
• If the answer to question 1 is acidosis and HCO3 – is elevated, then
respiratory acidosis.
• If the answer to question 1 is acidosis and HCO3 – is low, then metabolic
acidosis.
• If the answer to question 1 is alkalosis and HCO3 – is low, then respiratory
alkalosis.
• If the answer to question 1 is alkalosis and HCO3 – is elevated, then
metabolic alkalosis.
240
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 240 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 5 | ACID–BASE REGULATION
Question 3: Was there compensation?
Respiratory acidosis
Because kidney compensation is slow, it is important to distinguish between acute
(uncompensated) and chronic (compensated) respiratory disturbances.
• If acute, there is a 0.1 mEq/L rise in HCO3 – for every 1 mm Hg increase in
PaCO2 (1:0.1 ratio).
• If chronic, there is a 0.35 mEq/L rise in HCO3 – for every 1 mm Hg rise in
PaCO2 (1:0.35 ratio).
For example, a patient has arespiratory acidosis (determined by steps 1 and 2)
with PaCO2 60 mm Hg, which is 20 mm Hg greater than the normal of 40 mm
Hg.
If acute, then bicarbonate will be ~26 (20 × 0.1 = 2; 24 + 2 = 26). If chronic, then
bicarbonate will be ~31 (20 × 0.35 = 24 + 7 =31).
Metabolic acidosis
The patient’s PaCO2 should fall to a level that is ±2 mm Hg of the value computed
by Winter’s equation:
PaCO2 = (1.5 × HCO3 –) + 8
• If the patient’s PaCO2 is within 2, then the patient has metabolic acidosis
with respiratory compensation.
• If it is higher than 2, then the respiratory response is inadequate and the
patient has metabolic and respiratory acidosis.
• If the patient’s PaCO2 is too low, then the patient has a metabolic acidosis
with a respiratory alkalosis.
For example, a patient has ametabolic acidosis with a HCO3 – of 10 mEq/L and a
PaCO2 of 23 mm Hg. Expected PaCO2 is (1.5 × 10) + 8 = 23 mm Hg, which is
what the patient has, thus respiratory compensation is adequate.
Respiratory alkalosis
Again, it is important to distinguish between acute (uncompensated) and chronic
(compensated) respiratory disturbances.
• If acute, there is a 0.2 mEq/L fall in HCO3 – for every 1 mm Hg decrease in
PaCO2 (1:0.2 ratio).
• If chronic, there is a 0.5 mEq/L fall in HCO3 – for every 1 mm Hg decrease
in PaCO2 (1:0.5 ratio).
For example, a patient has arespiratory alkalosis (determined by steps 1 and 2)
with a PaCO2 of 25 mm Hg, which is 15 mm Hg less than the normal of 40 mm
Hg. If acute, then bicarbonate will be about 21 (15 × 0.2 = 3; 24 – 3 = 21), but if
chronic it will be around 16 (15 × 0.5 = 7.5; 24 – 7.5 = 16.5).
241
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 241 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Metabolic alkalosis
NOTE The patient’s PaCO2 should rise to a level that is ±2 the value computed by the
following equation (not to exceed 55 mm Hg):
Remember to calculate the anion gap to
Patholog d y ifferentiate the possible Beh c a a v u i s o e r s aSlcienc o e f /So a ciaSlciences Expected PaCO2 = (0.7 × rise in HCO3 –) + 40
metabolic acidosis.
• If the patient’s PaCO2 is within 2, the patient has metabolic alkalosis with
respiratory compensation.
Microbiology • If it is higher than 2, then the patient has metabolic alkalosis and respira
tory acidosis.
• If the patient’s PaCO2 is too low, then the patient has a metabolic and
respiratory alkalosis.
For example, a patient has a metabolic alkalosis with HCO3 – 34 mEq/L
(10 greater than normal) and PaCO2 47 mm Hg. Expected PaCO2 is
(10 × 0.7) + 40 = 47 mm Hg, which is what the patient has, thus respiratory
compensation is adequate.
The figure below can be helpful to remember the 3 basic steps for analyzing an
ABG and come to the correct diagnosis.
NOTE
Osis?
ACIDOSIS ALKALOSIS
In respiratory acidosis, PaCO2 is (pH)
increased; compensatory increase Low High
in metabolic alkalosis (formula (Acidosis) (Alkalosis)
computes compensation value of
Cause of Cause of
PaCO2). In respiratory alkalosis, the osis? the osis?
PaCO2 is decreased; compensatory Look at Look at
decrease in metabolic acidosis Bicarb Bicarb
(Winter’s determines compensation
Low Elevated Low Elevated
value of PaCO2).
NOTE
Metabolic Respiratory Respiratory Metabolic
Compute anion gap:
[Na+ – (Cl–+ bicarb)] Compensation? Compensation?
Use Winter’s Determine if Determine if Expected PaCO2
[(1.5 × bicarb) + 8] acute (1:0.1) acute (1:0.2) = (0.7 × rise in
to determine what or chronic or chronic HCO3 –) + 40
PaCO2 should be (1:0.35) (1:0.5)
Figure IX 1 3.
Figure VI 5 3. Analyzing an ABG
242
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 242 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 5 | ACID–BASE REGULATION
Some ABGs showing disturbance follow below:
Example 1: pH 7.3, HCO3 – 14 mEq/L, PCO2 30 mm Hg, PO2 95 mm Hg
Example 2: pH 7.6, HCO3 – 20 mEq/L, PCO2 20 mm Hg, PO2 95 mm Hg
Example 3: pH 7.2, HCO3 – 30 mEq/L, PCO2 80 mm Hg, PO2 70 mm Hg
Example 4: pH 7.6, HCO3 – 44 mEq/L, PCO2 52 mm Hg, PO2 70 mm Hg
Example 5: HCO3 – 20 mEq/L, PCO2 55 mm Hg
Answers
Example 1: What is the osis? pH is low, so acidosis. Cause of the osis? HCO3 – is
low, so metabolic acidosis. Compensation? Use Winter’s to compute predicted
PCO2: (14 × 1.5) + 8 = 29. Patient’s is 30, which is within 2, thus this is a meta
bolic acidosis with respiratory compensation.
Example 2: What is the osis? pH is high, so alkalosis. Cause of the osis? HCO3 –is
low, so respiratory alkalosis. Compensation? Must determine if acute
(uncompensated) or chronic (compensated). PCO2 is 20 below normal, thus acute:
20 × 0.2 = 4, so HCO3 – will be around 20 (24 – 4). If chronic, it would be 20 × 0.5
= 10, so HCO3 – would be around 14 (24 – 10). The measured equals the predicted
acute, thus this is an acute respiratory alkalosis.
Example 3: What is the osis? pH is low, so acidosis. Cause of the osis? HCO3 – is
high, so respiratory acidosis. Compensation? Must determine if acute
(uncompensated) or chronic (compensated). PCO2 is 40 greater than normal,
thus acute: 40 × 0.1 = 4, so HCO3 – will be around 28 (24 + 4). If chronic, it will
be 40 × 0.35 = 14, so HCO3 – will be around 38 (24 + 14). The measured is much
closer to the predicted acute, thus this is an acute respiratory acidosis.
Example 4: What is the osis? pH is high, so alkalosis. Cause of the osis? HCO3 –
is high, so metabolic alkalosis. Compensation? The respiratory compensation is to
reduce ventilation, thereby increasing PaCO2. Thus, we need to compute what
PaCO2 should be in a patient with this acid base disorder. Calculation: HCO3 – is
20 greater than normal of 24, 20 × 0.7 = 14, thus PaCO2 should be 14 mm Hg
greater than the normal of 40, thus 40 + 14 = 54 (predicted PaCO2). Patient’s is 52,
which is within 2, so this is a metabolic alkalosis with respiratory compensation.
Example 5: No pH is given, but we can still figure out the acid base disorder.
HCO3 – is low, so this must be a metabolic acidosis or respiratory alkalosis (review
Follow the Bicarbonate Trail). PaCO2 is well above normal, ruling out a respiratory
alkalosis, thus there is a mixed metabolic and respiratory acidosis. Note that
PaCO2 and HCO3 – went in opposite directions, so we know there is a mixed
disturbance. The low HCO3 –indicates the metabolic acidosis, while the high
PaCO2 indicates respiratory acidosis. If this were simply a respiratory acidosis,
HCO3 – would be elevated, not reduced.
243
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 243 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATION
The Davenport plot (Figure VI 5 4, panels A–E) provides a graphical representa
tion of the preceding discussion. The pH is on the x axis, and HCO3 – is on the
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences y axis.
At pH 7.4 and HCO3 – 24, PaCO2 is 40 (panel A). These represent the gold stan
dards indicated above. Knowing either of the 2 measurements allows one to
calculate the third, using the Henderson Hasselbalch equation.
Microbiology
[HCO3 –]
pH = pK + log pK = 6.10 [HCO3 –] in mmol/L
aPCO2
a = 0.0301 PCO2 in mm Hg
The red line in panel B shows the change in pH and HCO3 – when PCO2 is altered.
Specifically, pH falls and HCO3 – rises as PCO2 increases (up and left in panel B),
while pH increases and HCO3 – falls in response to a decrease in PCO2 (down and
right in panel B). Thus, the red line is the normal buffer line for blood depicting
acute respiratory disturbances, acidosis (up and left) and alkalosis (down and
right). These changes are not compensatory; it is simply the chemical reaction
occurring.
The purple line in panel B represents changes in pH and HCO3 – associated with
non respiratory disturbances, i.e, metabolic. Moving down and left indicates the
fall in pH and HCO3 – that is characteristic of metabolic acidosis. Moving up and
right shows the rise in pH and HCO3 – that is characteristic of metabolic alkalosis.
For these changes, PCO2 is unaffected (changes in PaCO2 during a metabolic
acid base disturbance are compensatory). Because PCO2 is constant, the purple
line is referred to as a CO2 isobar. Panel B depicts 3 different isobars and their
respective levels of PCO2.
Let’s now walk through the 3 questions and see the corresponding values on the
Davenport plot.
Question 1: What is the osis?
Splitting the graph at pH 7.4, anything to the left represents an acidosis, while
anything to the right represents an alkalosis (panel C).
CO2 H+ + HCO3 – CO2 H+ + HCO3 –
Respiratory acidosis: 60
40
mEq/L Increasing CO2 20
mEq/
30 30 Metabolic alkalosis:
–] –] No change in CO2
[HCO3
25
[HCO325
PCO2 Isobar
20
20 24 PCO2 = 40 mmHg
Metabolic acidosis: Respiratory alkalosis:
No change in CO2 Decreasing CO2
7.3 7.4 7.5 7.3 7.4 7.5
pH pH
Figure IX 1 4a Figure VI 5 4b
Figure VI5 4A Figure VI 5 4B
244
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 244 15/10/22 2:21PM
CHAPTER 5 | ACID–BASE REGULATION
–
CO2 H+ + HCO3
mEq/
Acidosis Alkalosis
30
–]
[HCO3
25
20
7.3 7.4 7.5
pH
FigFurigeureVI 5 4CIX 1 4b
Question 2: What is the cause of the osis?
• Respiratory acidosis is characterized by a decrease in pH with concomitant
rise in HCO3 –, while respiratory alkalosis is characterized by a rise in pH
with concomitant fall in HCO3 – (red line in panel D)
• Metabolic acidosis is a decrease in pH and HCO3 –, while metabolic
alkalosis is an increase in pH and HCO3 – (purple line in panel D). Again,
the purple line denotes metabolic changes without accompanying CO2
changes (PCO2 isobar).
• This separates the graph into 4 quadrants (panel D). Points falling within
one of these quadrants show the respective primary acid base disturbance.
– Upper left, respiratory acidosis
– Lower left, metabolic acidosis
– Lower right, respiratory alkalosis
– Upper right, metabolic alkalosis
Question 3: Was there compensation?
There is no need to be as quantitative when using the Davenport plot to answer
this question. Simply determine if the pH moved toward normal (7.4).
• The red respiratory and purple metabolic lines represent buffer lines, thus
compensation follows the same plane as it moves toward 7.4.
• The direction the curve shifts if compensation occurred is depicted
by the solid black arrows (panel E).
245
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 245 15/10/22 2:21PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
CO2 H+ + HCO3 – CO2 H+ + HCO3 –
Renal
40
compensation for
Respiratory acidosis Metabolic alkalosis
mEq/L respiratory acidosis
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences Respiratory
mEq/
30 compensation for
–] 30 metabolic alkalosis
[HCO325 –]
[HCO325
20
20 Respiratory
Microbiology
compensation Renal
Metabolic acidosis Respiratory alkalosis compensation for
for metabolic
respiratory alkalosis
acidosis
7.3 7.4 7.5
7.3 7.4 7.5
pH
pH
Figure VI 5 4d
Figure IX 1 4d
Figure VI 5 4D Figure VI 5 4E
The Davenport plot below shows unlabeled points. You are encouraged to try and
indicate the correct acid base disturbance depicted by the points.
Answers are provided below.
A: acute (uncompensated) respiratory
acidosis C
B: chronic (compensated) respiratory B
mEq/L
acidosis 30
A
C: metabolic alkalosis with respiratory [ – H ] CO3 25
E
compensation
20
F
D: metabolic acidosis with respiratory D
compensation
E: acute (uncompensated) respiratory 7.3 7.4 7.5
alkalosis
pH
F: chronic (compensated) respiratory
Figure IX1 5
alkalosis Figure VI 5 5
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Respiratory Acidosis
A respiratory acidosis is the result of CO2 accumulating in the body, which causes
an increase in H+ (or decrease in pH) and an increase in HCO3 –. Quantitatively, in
the acute (uncompensated) state, for every 10 mm Hg rise in PaCO2, HCO3 – rises
about 1 mEq/L and pH falls by 0.08 pH units.
Respiratory acidosis can be caused by the following:
• Respiratory center depression (anesthetics, morphine)
• Pulmonary edema, cardiac arrest
246
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 246 15/10/22 2:21PM
CHAPTER 5 | ACID–BASE REGULATION
• Airway obstruction
• Muscle relaxants
• Sleep apnea
• Chronic obstructive lung disease
• Neuromuscular defects (multiple sclerosis, muscular dystrophy)
• Obesity hypoventilation syndrome
Summary: The cause is an increase in PaCO2. The result is a decrease in pH and
slight increase in HCO3 –.
Metabolic Acidosis
This is caused by a gain in fixed (not of CO2 origin) acid and/or a loss of base. The
increased H+ drives the reaction to the left, decreasing HCO3 –. Forcing the
reaction to the left produces some CO2, but the hyperventilation evoked by the
acidosis eliminates CO2.
As described above, the possible cause of the acidosis can be narrowed by deter
mining the anion gap (MUDPIILES for elevated; HARDUP if gap is normal).
Summary: The cause is a gain in H+ as fixed acid and/or a loss of HCO3 – (via GI
tract or kidney). The result is a decrease in pH and HCO3 – and compensatory fall
in PaCO2.
Respiratory Alkalosis
This is caused by an increase in alveolar ventilation relative to body production of
CO2 (hyperventilation). Quantitatively, in the acute (uncompensated) state, for
every 10 mm Hg decrease in PaCO2, HCO3 – decreases about 2 mEq/L and pH
rises 0.08 pH units.
Respiratory alkalosis can be caused by:
• Anxiety
• Fever
• Hypoxemia
• Pneumothorax (in some cases)
• Ventilation–perfusion inequality
• Hypotension
• High altitude
Summary: The cause is a decrease in PaCO2. The result is a decrease in H+
(increased pH) and slight decrease in HCO3 –.
247
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 247 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VI | RENAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Metabolic Alkalosis
This is caused by a loss of fixed acid and/or gain of base. The decreased H+ forces
the reaction to the right, increasing HCO3 –.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
A compensatory rise in PaCO2 is expected because the alkalosis decreases
ventilation.
Causes:
Microbiology • Vomiting or gastric suctioning
• Loop and thiazide diuretic use
• Bartter, Gitelman, and Liddle syndromes
• Intracellular shift of hydrogen ions as in hypokalemia
• Primary hyperaldosteronism
• Loss of bicarbonate free fluid (contraction alkalosis)
Summary: The cause is a loss of H+ and/or gain in HCO3 –. The result is an
increase in pH and HCO3 –; compensatory rise in PaCO2.
Recall Question
A 17 year old woman is found to have type 1 diabetes mellitus.
Which of the following metabolic acid base disorders is most likely
to be seen in her?
A. Decreased anion gap metabolic acidosis
B. Respiratory acidosis with metabolic compensation
C. Respiratory alkalosis with metabolic compensation
D. Increased anion gap metabolic acidosis
E. Metabolic alkalosis with respiratory compensation
Answer: D
248
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 248 15/10/22 2:21P
PART VII
ENDOCRINOLOGY
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 249 15/10/22 2:21P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 250 15/10/22 2:21P
General Aspects of the
1#
Endocrine System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Demonstrate understanding of overview of hormones
❏ Answer questions about disorders of the endocrine system
HORMONES
Lipid Versus Water Soluble Hormones
There are several major differences between the lipid soluble hormones and the
water soluble hormones.
Steroid hormones Peptide hormones and
Thyroid hormones biogenic amines
Membrane receptor
G protein
Second messengers
IP3: inositol triphosphate
cAMP Ca2+ IP3 DAG DAG: diacylglycerol
Nuclear
receptor
Protein phosphorylation/
dephosphorylation
mRNA
Protein (enzyme) Enzyme regulation
synthesis
Figure VII 1 1. Signal Transduction Mechanisms
Figure X 1 1. Signal Transduction Mechanisms
251
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 251 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Table VII 1 1. Major Classes of Hormones
Lipid Soluble Hormones Water Soluble Hormones
(steroids, thyroid hormones) (peptides, proteins)
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Receptors Inside the cell, Outer surface of the
usually in nucleus cell membrane
Intracellular Stimulates synthesis • Production of second
action of specific new proteins messengers, e.g.,
Microbiology
cAMP
• Insulin does not
utilize cAMP, instead
activates membrane
bound tyrosine kinase
• Second messengers
modify action of
intracellular proteins
(enzymes)
Storage • Synthesized as needed • Stored in vesicles
• Exception: thyroid • In some cases,
hormones prohormone stored in
vesicle along with an
enzyme that splits off
the active hormone
Prohormone
stored in vesicle
Active hormone
Inactive
peptide
Plasma • Attached to proteins Dissolved in plasma
Figure IX 1 1
transport that serve as carriers (free, unbound)
• Exception: adrenal
androgens
Half life Long (hours, days) Short (minutes)
μ to affinity for protein μ to molecular weight
carrier
Protein Bound and Free Circulating Hormones
The liver produces proteins that bind lipid soluble hormones, e.g.:
• cortisol binding globulin
• thyroid binding globulin
• sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG)
The lipid soluble hormone circulating in plasma bound to protein is in equilib
rium with a small amount of free hormone. It is the free form that is available to
the tissues, and thus the free unbound form normally determines the plasma
activity. It is the free form that also creates negative feedback.
252
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 252 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 1 | GENERAL ASPECTS OF THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
e.g., Cortisol
P H H
T4 (and T3)
Bound Free Estrogens
hormone hormone testosterone
Total Hormone in Blood = Bound + Free
Active Hormone = Free Hormone
Figure FiXgure1 2V.IIT1ran2s.poTrtransport ofofLLiippiidd SoSluobluleble HormoHneosrmones
If the liver changes its production and release of binding proteins, the circulating
level of bound hormone will change. Under most conditions, however, the level
of free hormone will remain constant.
Liver dysfunction and androgens can decrease, and estrogens can increase, the
circulating level of binding proteins. For example, a rise in circulating estrogen
causes the release of more binding protein by the liver, which binds more free
hormone. The transient decrease in free hormone reduces negative feedback to the
hormone secreting tissue. The increased secretion of free hormone quickly returns
the plasma free hormone to normal.
This explains why during pregnancy and other states with a rise in estrogen levels:
• Total plasma lipid soluble hormone increases.
• Free plasma hormone remains constant at a normal level; thus, the
individual does not show signs of hyperfunction.
Hormone Receptors
A hormone affects only cells that possess receptors specific to that particular
hormone. For example, both adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and
luteinizing hormone (LH) increase secretion of steroid hormones, yet ACTH does
so only in the adrenal cortex and LH only in gonadal tissue.
• Under normal conditions, receptors are not saturated; e.g., extra receptors
exist. Therefore, the number of hormone receptors is not rate limiting for
hormone action. The plasma concentration of free hormone is usually
indicative of activity.
• Resistance to hormone action results from abnormalities in receptors or
events distal to the ligand receptor interaction (often due to chronic
elevation of circulating hormone (e.g., type II diabetes) or drug therapy).
Under these conditions, receptors are often saturated.
– Reduction of hormone levels often produces some recovery in sensitivity.
– The clinical presentation is often one of normal or elevated hormone
levels but with reduced or absent peripheral manifestations of the
hormone and a failure of replacement therapy to correct the problem.
• Permissive action is a phenomenon in which one type of hormone must
be present before another hormone can act; e.g., cortisol must be present
for glucagon to carry out gluconeogenesis and prevent hypoglycemia.
253
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 253 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Measurement of Hormone Levels
Plasma analysis provides information at the time of sampling only and may not
reflect the overall secretion rate.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
• When hormone secretion is episodic, single sampling may reflect peaks
(erroneous hyperfunction) or nadirs (erroneous hypofunction). Pulsatile
secretion, diurnal and cyclic variation, age, sleep entrainment, and
hormone antagonism must all be considered in evaluating circulating
Microbiology levels.
• Growth hormone is secreted in pulses and mainly at night. This is not
reflected in a fasting morning sample. However, growth hormone stimu
lates the secretion of IGF I, which circulates attached to protein and has a
long half life (20 hours). Plasma IGF I measured at any time during the
day is usually a good index of overall growth hormone secretion.
• Thyroid is a fairly constant system, and T4 has a half life of about
6–7 days. Thus, a random measurement of total T4 is usually a good
estimate of daily plasma levels.
Urine analysis is restricted to the measurement of catecholamines, steroid
hormones, and water soluble hormones such as hCG and LH.
• A distinct advantage of urine analysis is that it provides an integrated
sample.
• A “24 hour urine free cortisol” is often necessary to pick up a low level
Cushing’s syndrome and to eliminate the highs and lows of the normal
circadian rhythm.
DISORDERS OF THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
Primary versus Secondary Disorders
A primary disorder means dysfunction originating in the endocrine gland itself,
either hyper or hypofunction. Examples include:
• Excess cortisol from an adrenal adenoma (Cushing syndrome)
• Decreased thyroid secretion (Hashimoto’s thyroiditis)
• Reduced ADH secretion (central diabetes insipidus)
A secondary disorder indicates that a disturbance has occurred causing the gland
to secrete more or less of the hormone. Examples include:
• Cushing disease (pituitary adenoma secreting ACTH) resulting in hyper
cortisolism
• A dehydrated patient with elevated plasma osmolality causing high ADH
level
254
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 254 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 1 | GENERAL ASPECTS OF THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
Hypofunction
Hypofunction is caused by autoimmune disease (e.g., type I diabetes, hypothyroid
ism, primary adrenal insufficiency, gonadal failure), tumors, hemorrhage, infec
tion, damage by neoplasms
Evaluation is with a stimulation test:
• Hypothalamic hormones test anterior pituitary reserve
• Injection of the pituitary trophic hormone (e.g., ACTH) tests target gland
reserve
• Failure of growth hormone release after arginine injection
Hyperfunction
Hyperfunction is caused by hormone secreting tumors, hyperplasia, autoimmune
stimulation, ectopically produced peptide hormones (e.g., ACTH, ADH).
Evaluation is with a suppression test:
• Failure of glucose to suppress growth hormone diagnostic for acromegaly
• Failure of dexamethasone (low dose) to suppress cortisol diagnostic for
hypercortisolism
• Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) represents a group of inheritable
syndromes characterized by multiple benign or malignant tumors.
o MEN 1: hyperparathyroidism, endocrine pancreas, and pituitary
adenomas
o MEN 2A: medullary carcinoma of the thyroid, pheochromocytoma,
hyperparathyroidism
o MEN 2B: medullary carcinoma of the thyroid, pheochromocytoma,
mucosal neuromas (tongue and lips), GI disorders, thick eyelids, and
marfanoid habitus (muscle, joint, spinal, bone alterations)
Gland Structure and Size
When an endocrine gland does not receive its normal stimulus, it generally under
goes a reversible atrophy.
• Long term high doses of glucocorticoids suppress the ACTH adrenal axis.
Withdrawal of therapy can require up to a year for complete recovery.
• Overstimulation of endocrine tissue can cause cell proliferation or
hypertrophy in addition to hormone overproduction. In Graves’ disease,
overstimulation of the thyroid tissues causes cell proliferation, and the
resulting polyclonal expansion creates a goiter in addition to
hyperthyroidism.
• Tumors, which are generally monoclonal expansions, may also create a
hyperfunction. Others produce little if any hormone but are still disease
producing because of the compressive (mass) effect of the additional
tissue.
255
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 255 15/10/22 2:21P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 256 15/10/22 2:21P
Hypothalamic–Anterior
2#
Pituitary System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Solve problems concerning hypothalamic–anterior pituitary axis
❏ Solve problems concerning disorders of the hypothalamic anterior
pituitary axis
HYPOTHALAMIC–ANTERIOR PITUITARY AXIS
The hormones in the hypothalamic–anterior pituitary system are all water soluble.
• The hypothalamic hormones are synthesized in the neuron cell body,
packaged in vesicles, and transported down the axon to be stored and
released from the nerve terminals into the blood at the median eminence
(part of the pituitary stalk).
• From the capillaries of the median eminence, these hypothalamic hor
mones travel to the capillaries of the anterior pituitary where they stimu
late/inhibit hormone release from the anterior pituitary. This is the
hypothalamic hypophyseal portal system.
• The pituitary is located in the bony sella turcica at the base of the skull. It
hangs from the hypothalamus by a stalk (the infundibulum) and is
controlled by the hypothalamus. The dura membrane (diaphragm sellae)
separates it from and prevents cerebrospinal fluid from entering the sella
turcica.
• The optic chiasm is 5–10 mm above this diaphragm.
• In the hypothalamic–anterior pituitary system, hormonal release is mainly
pulsatile (a possible exception is the thyroid system).
• The hypothalamic nuclei involved are as follows:
– Arcuate → dopamine and GHRH
– Preoptic/Arcuate region → GnRH
– Paraventricular → CRH, TRH, and SST
• The pulsatile release of these hormones is thought to prevent the down
regulation of receptors in the anterior pituitary. Clinically, this is particu
larly relevant for GnRH.
The hypothalamic–anterior pituitary system is summarized below.
257
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 257 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Effect of Hypothalamic Hormones on Anterior Pituitary
+ = releaser Hypothalamus Pituitary Target Secretion
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
− = inhibitor
+
TRH Thyrotrophs (10%) TSH
+
CRH Corticotrophs (10–25%) ACTH
Microbiology +
GnRH* Gonadotrophs (10–15%) LH, FSH
+
GHRH** Somatotrophs (50%) GH
−
SST
−
Dopamine*** Lactotrophs (10–15%) Prolactin
+
TRH (elevated)
*High frequency pulses favor LH, low frequency pulses favor FSH
**The fact that eliminating hypothalamic input causes a decrease in growth hormone secretion
indicates that GHRH is the main controlling factor.
***When the connection between the hypothalamus and the anterior pituitary is severed
(e.g., there is damage to the pituitary stalk), secretion of all anterior pituitary hormones
decreases (except prolactin, which increases because a chronic source of inhibition
(dopamine) has been removed).
FigureFigure XVII2221.. CCoonnttrrooll of thoef AthneteriorAntePriioturitary Pituitary
DISORDERS OF THE HYPOTHALAMIC–ANTERIOR
TRH: thyrotropin releasing hormone
TSH: thyroid stimulating hormone or PITUITARY AXIS
thyrotropin
CRH: corticotropin releasing hormone Hypopituitarism
ACTH: adrenocorticotropic hormone or Hypopituitarism can be inherited, but other causes include head trauma (most
common), mass effects of tumors, inflammation, or vascular damage
corticotropin
GnRH: gonadotropin releasing hormone • Characteristic sequential loss of function: growth hormone and gonado
tropin, followed by TSH then ACTH and finally prolactin
LH: luteinizing hormone
• Isolated deficiency:
FSH: follicle stimulating hormone
– Growth hormone: sporadic or familial
GHRH: growth hormone–releasing
hormone – Gonadotropins: Kallmann syndrome – (tertiary) defective GnRH
synthesis
GH: growth hormone
– Decreased LH, FSH, and sex steroids
SST: somatostatin
– ACTH, TSH, and prolactin deficiencies (extremely rare) are usually a
sign of panhypopituitarism
• Craniopharyngioma is the most common tumor affecting the
hypothalamic–pituitary system in children (pituitary adenoma rare).
• Although one would predict the trophic hormones to be low, this is not
often the case. Typically, they are in the normal range, but their level is
inadequate to stimulate peripheral glands adequately.
• From an academic perspective, stimulation tests include. GnRH → LH,
FSH; TRH → TSH, prolactin; insulin infusion → GH, ACTH
258
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 258 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 2 | HYPOTHALAMIC–ANTERIOR PITUITARY SYSTEM
With Sheehan syndrome, the pituitary in pregnancy is enlarged and thus more CLINICAL CORRELATE
vulnerable to infarction. When delivery is associated with severe blood loss, the
Some degree of hypopituitarism has been
ensuing shock may cause arteriolar spasm in the pituitary with subsequent
reported in 32% of women with severe
ischemic necrosis.
postpartum hemorrhage. Symptoms vary,
depending on the extent and location of
Pituitary Adenoma pituitary damage, but failure to lactate for
Pituitary adenoma is the most common cause of hypothalamic–pituitary dysfunc days following birth is a strong sign of
tion. It is usually benign and can autonomously secrete hormone, leading to pituitary damage.
hyperprolactinemia (60%), acromegaly (growth hormone) (20%), and Cushing
disease (ACTH) (10%).
• Hypogonadism is most common manifestation (galactorrhea also a
symptom of prolactinoma)
• MEN 1 association
• Classification according to size
– Microadenoma (<1 cm diameter): hormonal excess, no panhypopitu
itarism, treatable, e.g., ACTH (Cushing disease)
– Macroadenoma (>1 cm diameter): mass effect, larger tumors with
suprasellar extension, associated with panhypopituitarism and visual
loss
Recall Question
A 48 year old woman undergoes surgical removal of a pituitary
macroadenoma when the pituitary stalk is accidentally cauterized.
An increase in which of the following is most likely to be noted on
labs?
A. Thyroid stimulating hormone
B. Prolactin
C. Cortisol
D. Dopamine
E. Follicle stimulating hormone
Answer: B
259
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 259 15/10/22 2:21P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 260 15/10/22 2:21P
3#
Posterior Pituitary
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Answer questions about hormones of the posterior pituitary
❏ Explain information related to regulation of ECF volume and osmolarity
❏ Answer questions about pathophysiologic changes in ADH secretion
❏ Use knowledge of hyponatremia
HORMONES OF THE POSTERIOR PITUITARY
The hormones of the posterior pituitary are made up of distal neuron terminals.
The secreted hormones are arginine vasopressin (ADH) and oxytocin, both
peptide hormones.
• Cell bodies are located in the supraoptic nucleus and paraventricular
nucleus of the hypothalamus.
• ADH is a major controller of water excretion and regulator of extracellular
osmolarity.
• The osmoreceptor neurons in the hypothalamus are extremely sensitive
and are able to maintain ECF osmolarity within a very narrow range.
• There is a downward shift in plasma osmolarity regulation in pregnancy,
during menstruation, and with volume depletion. In the latter case
osmoregulation is secondary to volume regulation; a return of circulating
volume occurs even though osmolarity decreases.
• Volume receptors are less sensitive than osmoreceptors, and a change of
10–15% in volume is required to produce a measurable change in ADH.
• Angiotensin II and CRH can stimulate the release of ADH.
ADH secretion is regulated by the posterior pituitary using neural control mecha
nisms. The principal inputs are inhibition by baroreceptors and cardiopulmonary
mechanoreceptors, and stimulation by osmoreceptors.
261
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 261 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Microbiology
Carotid
Atria sinus
Large
veins
Stretch Receptors Osmoreceptors
↓ Volume ↑ Osmolarity
+
+ ↓ Afferent activity ↑ ADH + Increases release of ADH
↑ ADH Nerves – Decreases release of ADH
IX and X – ↓ Osmolarity
↑ Volume
↓ ADH
– ↑ Afferent activity
↓ ADH
Supraoptic and Paraventricular Nuclei Renal Collecting Duct
300
Synthesis
of ADH By increasing the
permeability of renal
Increased collecting ducts, water
ADH water is reabsorbed passively
(antidiuretic
reabsorption
hormone)
(+ urea)
Posterior pituitary 1200
stores and releases ADH mOsm
Figure VII 3 1. Neural Control Mechanism
Figure X 3 1. Neural Control Mechanism
262
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 262 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 3 | POSTERIOR PITUITARY
Synthesis and Release of ADH
ADH is synthesized in the supraoptic (SO) and paraventricular (PVN) nuclei
of the hypothalamus; it is stored and released from the posterior pituitary.
• Osmoreceptors are neurons that respond to increased plasma osmolarity,
principally plasma sodium concentration. They synapse with neurons of
the SO and PVN and stimulate them to secrete ADH from the posterior
pituitary. They also stimulate consumption of water through hypotha
lamic centers that regulate thirst.
• The SO and PVN also receive input from cardiopulmonary mechanore
ceptors, as well as arterial baroreceptors. High blood volume or blood
pressure tends to inhibit secretion of ADH.
• Secretion of ADH is most sensitive to plasma osmolarity (1%); however, if NOTE
blood volume decreases by 10% (such as hemorrhage) or cardiac output
ADH is also stimulated by Ang IIand CRH.
falls, high levels of ADH are secreted even if it causes abnormal plasma
osmolarity.
Action of ADH
The main target tissue is the renal CD (V2 receptors).
• ADH increases the permeability of the duct to water by placing water
channels (aquaporins) in the luminal membrane.
• ADH, acting via the V1 receptor, contracts vascular smooth muscle.
REGULATION OF ECF VOLUME AND OSMOLARITY
Osmoregulation
• An increase of only 1% in the osmolality of the ECF bathing the hypotha
lamic osmoreceptors evokes an increase in ADH secretion.
• A similarly sized decrease in osmolality decreases ADH secretion.
• In this manner, ECF osmolality is kept very close to 285 mOsm/Kg.
Volume Regulation
• Stimuli arising from stretch receptors act to chronically inhibit ADH
secretion.
• Decreases in blood volume cause venous and arterial stretch receptors to
send fewer signals to the CNS, decreasing chronic inhibition of ADH
secretion.
• This mechanism is especially important for restoring ECF volume follow
ing a hemorrhage.
Effect of Alcohol and Weightlessness on ADH Secretion
Ingesting ethyl alcohol or being in a weightless environment suppresses ADH
secretion. In weightlessness, there is a net shift of blood from the limbs to the
abdomen and chest. This results in greater stretch of the volume receptors in the
large veins and atria, thus suppressing ADH secretion. Water immersion to the
neck produces a similar phenomenon.
263
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 263 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
CLINICAL CORRELATE Natriuretic Peptides
Circulating levels of BNP increase in heart ANP is a hormone secreted by the heart. It is found throughout the heart but
failure (both systolic and diastolic failure). mainly in the right atrium. The stimuli that release ANP (two peptides are
PathologFyor this reason, the plasmBaehavioleravSlecliencoef/SoBciNaSlPcienicses released) are as follows:
now often used as a marker for the severity • Stretch, an action independent of nervous involvement
of heart failure. • CHF and all fluid overload states
ANP increases sodium loss (natriuresis) and water loss by the kidney because
Microbiology
BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY of, in part, an increase in glomerular filtration rate due to the following:
Sacubitril is a drug that inhibits neprilysin. • ANP mediated dilation of the afferent arteriole
By inhibiting neprilysin, ANP and BNP levels • ANP mediated constriction of the efferent arteriole
remain elevated for longer periods of time,
ANP also increases sodium loss (natriuresis) and water loss (diuresis) by the
leading to natriuresis, vasodilation, and
kidney because it inhibits renin release as well as the reabsorption of sodium and
reduced cardiac fibrosis and hypertrophy.
water in the CD.
• Sacubitril is used in combination with
The physiologic importance of ANP is not known because it has not been possible
the ARB valsartan because blocking
to identify or produce a specific deficiency state in humans. However, ANP
neprilysin also increases angiotensin II, secretion increases in weightlessness and submersion to the neck in water, while
and valsartan helps to counteract the renin, aldosterone, and ADH secretion decrease. It may play a role in normal
deleterious effects of high levels of regulation of the ECF osmolality and volume.
angiotensin II.Although ANP/BNP can
ANP tends to antagonize the effects of aldosterone and ADH.
inhibit renin (and thus angiotensin II),
in the setting of dilated hearts, their A normal ANP level is used to exclude CHF as a cause of dyspnea.
ability to inhibit renin is reduced and/
In addition to ANP, the heart produces brain natriuretic peptide (BNP).
or absent.
• In the normal heart very little BNP is produced and secreted. BNP has the
• This combination has been shown to same effects as ANP, and both are vasoactive peptides.
improve mortality in patients with • However, if the heart dilates, e.g., heart failure, both ANP and BNP
systolic heart failure compared to ACE secretion are markedly elevated. Studies suggest that they may reduce
inhibitors alone. cardiac fibrosis and hypertrophy in systolic heart failure, and they
vasodilate arterioles thereby reducing blood pressure.
• Side effects of sacubitril/valsartan are
• ANP and BNP are metabolized by an enzyme known as neprilysin.
angioedema and cough (since
However, neprilysin is not selective for these peptides because it also
neprilysin breaks down bradykinin). breaks down angiotensin II and bradykinin.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGIC CHANGES IN ADH SECRETION
Diabetes Insipidus
The consequences can be explained on the basis of the lack of an effect of ADH on
the renal CDs.
Central diabetes insipidus (CDI)
• Sufficient ADH is not available to affect the renal CDs.
• Causes include familial, tumors (craniopharyngioma), autoimmune,
trauma
• Pituitary trauma – transient diabetes insipidus
264
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 264 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 3 | POSTERIOR PITUITARY
• Sectioning of pituitary stalk – triphasic response: diabetes insipidus,
followed by SIADH, followed by a return of diabetes insipidus
• Destruction of the hypothalamus from any cause can lead to diabetes
insipidus. Forms of hypothalamic destruction are stroke, hypoxia, head
trauma, infection, cancer or mass lesions.
• CDI = ADH deficiency. CDI is treated with replacing ADH as vasopressin
or DDAVP (desmopressin).
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
• Due to inability of the kidneys to respond to ADH
• Causes include familial, acquired, drugs (lithium)
• Hypokalemia
• Hypercalcemia
Lithium, low potassium, and high calcium all diminish ADH’s effectiveness on
principal cells. The precise mechanism is still unclear, but it may involve disrup
tion in the ability to traffic aquaporins to the luminal membrane of principal cells
of the kidney.
Table VII 3 1. Differential Diagnosis Following Water Deprivation
Urine Osm Post
Plasma Osm Urine Osm Plasma ADH Desmopressin
Normal 297 814 815
↑
Central DI* 342 102 ↓ 622
Nephrogenic 327 106 ↑ 118
* Patients with partial central DI will concentrate their urine somewhat but will achieve
an additional boost following desmopressin.
Syndrome of Inappropriate ADH Secretion (SIADH)
Excessive secretion of ADH causes an inappropriate increased reabsorption of
water in the renal CD.
Causes
• Ectopic production of ADH (any CNS or small cell lung pathology)
• Drug induced: SSRI, carbamazepine
• Lesions in the pathway of the baroreceptor system
Pathophysiology
• Increased water retention, hyponatremia, but clinically euvolemic
• Inappropriate concentration of urine, often greater than plasma osmolarity
• With hyponatremia, a normal person should have urine sodium and
osmolarity that are low. In SIADH, it is a disease because urine sodium
and osmolarity are inappropriately high.
265
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 265 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Treatment
• Fluid restriction but not salt restriction
• Sodium disorders cause neurological symptoms.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
• Only mild hyponatremia from SIADH can be managed with fluid restric
tion.
• Severe disease needs 3% hypertonic saline or V2 receptor antagonists.
• Conivaptan and tolvaptan are V2 receptor antagonists; they stop ADH
Microbiology
effect on kidney tubule.
Summary of Changes
Table VII 3 2. The Effects of Diabetes Insipidus, Dehydration, SIADH, and Primary Polydipsia
Diabetes Primary
Insipidus Dehydration SIADH Polydipsia
1. Permeability of
collecting ducts to ↓ ↑ ↑ ↓
H2O
2. Urine flow ↑ ↓ ↓ ↑
3. Urine osmolarity ↓ ↑ ↑ ↓
4. ECF volume ↓ ↓ ↑ ↑
5. ECF osmolarity*
↑ ↑ ↓ ↓
(Na concentration)
6. ICF volume ↓ ↓ ↑ ↑
7. ICF osmolarity ↑ ↑ ↓ ↓
* Overt physical and laboratory signs of dehydration do not necessarily develop unless
there is a defect in thirst stimulation.
HYPONATREMIA
Hyponatremia is one of the most common disorders of fluid and electrolyte
balance in hospitalized patients. It is usually equivalent to a hypo osmolar state
(exception hyperglycemia). It involves both solute depletion and water reten
tion, although water retention is usually the more important factor.
• Solute depletion can occur from any significant loss of ECF fluid. The
hyponatremia is the result of replacement by more hypotonic fluids.
• When it develops rapidly (<48 hours) and is severe (Na <120 mEq/L),
patient is at risk for seizures and respiratory arrest. It is often treated
aggressively with hypertonic saline (3%) and diuretics or ADH antago
nists.
• When it develops more slowly, it appears to be well tolerated and patient is
asymptomatic. Aggressive treatment may result in osmotic demyelination
syndrome (central pontine myelinolysis). The general recommendation is
to slowly raise Na concentration over a period of days.
266
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 266 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 3 | POSTERIOR PITUITARY
Hyponatremia can be classified as hypovolemic, hypervolemic, or euvolemic,
according to a patient’s volume status.
• Hypovolemia indicates solute depletion (e.g., mineralocorticoid deficiency,
diuretic abuse, renal disease, diarrhea, hemorrhage).
• Hypervolemia is caused by marked reduction in water excretion and/or
increased rate of water ingestion (e.g., congestive heart failure, cirrhosis).
• Clinical euvolemia includes SIADH and primary (psychogenic) polydip
sia; a clinically equivalent presentation may occur in glucocorticoid
deficiency or hypothyroidism.
Recall Question
ADH secretion is most sensitive to changes in which of the
following?
A. Plasma osmolarity
B. Plasma volume
C. Cardiac output
D. Ejection fraction
E. Peripheral vascular resistance
Answer: A
267
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 267 15/10/22 2:21P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 268 15/10/22 2:21P
4#
Adrenal Cortex
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Use knowledge of functional regions of the adrenal gland
❏ Demonstrate understanding of biosynthetic pathways of steroid
hormone synthesis
❏ Interpret scenarios on physiologic actions of glucocorticoids
❏ Solve problems concerning control of adrenocorticotropin and cortisol
secretion
❏ Demonstrate understanding of physiologic actions of aldosterone
❏ Explain information related to control of aldosterone secretion
❏ Explain information related to glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid
disorders
❏ Explain information related to enzyme deficiencies
FUNCTIONAL REGIONS OF THE ADRENAL GLAND
The figure below summarizes each adrenal region.
• ACTH controls the release of both cortisol and adrenal androgens.
• Aldosterone is stimulated by a rise in angiotensin II and/or K+.
REGION HORMONES CONTROLLED BY
Zona Aldosterone Angiotensin II, [K+]
Capsule glomerulosa
Zona
Cortisol
fasciculata
and ACTH
Zona
Androgens
reticularis
(LH has no effect on the production of adrenal androgens)
Medulla Epinephrine Autonomic nervous
system
Figure VII 4 1. Adrenal Cortex Regions
Figure X 4 1. Adrenal Cortex Regions
269
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 269 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
BIOSYNTHETIC PATHWAYS OF STEROID HORMONE
SYNTHESIS
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Synthesis of All Adrenal Steroids
The starting point in the synthesis of all steroid hormones is cholesterol. For the
adrenal glands, the source of cholesterol is primarily low density lipoprotein
(LDL) from the blood.
Microbiology
• Once taken up, cholesterol is transported into the mitochondria by
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR). This is the rate limiting
step for all steroid hormone synthesis.
• Once cholesterol is transported into the mitochondria, the next key step in
steroid hormone synthesis is the conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone.
This is catalyzed by cytochrome P450 side chain cleavage enzyme (SCC,
also called desmolase).
Synthesis in Zona Fasciculata and Zona Reticularis
Cortisol, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), and androstenedione (A) are the
primary hormones secreted from the zonas fasciculata and reticularis within the
adrenal cortex. Cortisol is a glucocorticoid, while DHEA and A are adrenal
steroids. The secretion of these hormones is under the control of ACTH.
• Beyond SCC, the pertinent enzymes required for cortisol synthesis are 17
α OH, 21 β OH, and 11 β OH.
• Beyond SCC, the pertinent enzyme required for adrenal androgen synthe
sis is 17 α OH.
• Cortisol is very lipid soluble and thus metabolized into a more water
soluble form by liver glucuronidation (see Biochemistry and Pharmacology
Lecture Notes). Even though very lipid soluble, newer assays can detect
cortisol in the urine and a 24 hr urine free cortisol can be done to detect
problems associated with cortisol. This urine sample provides a much
better index of overall cortisol levels throughout the day, which is impor
tant given that cortisol levels vary depending upon the time of day.
• Adrenal androgens are conjugated with sulfate in the adrenal cortex,
making them more water soluble. Because of this, they are primarily
removed from the body via the urine. These androgens are 17 ketosteroids.
Also, these circulating androgens can serve as substrates for the produc
tion of testosterone and estrogens in peripheral tissue.
• Cortisol has negative feedback on CRH secretion from the hypothalamus
and ACTH secretion from the anterior pituitary.
• Note: Aldosterone is not synthesized in zona fasciculata and reticularis.
270
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 270 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 4 | ADRENAL CORTEX
Pituitary
(–)
ACTH
LDL cAMP 17,20 Lyase
Adrenal androgens
(17,20)
17 α OH
17 OH steroids 17 ketosteroids
Cholesterol StAR and SCC
(17,20) Dehydroeplandro
17 α OH sterone (DHEA)
Pregnenolone 17 hydroxypregnenolone
3 β HSD
3 β HSD 3 β HSD
17 α OH (17,20)
Progesterone 17 hydroxyprogesterone
Androstenedione
21 β OH (A)
21 β OH
11 deoxycorticosterone,
a weak mineralocorticoid 11 deoxycortisol
11 β OH 11 β OH HSD: hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase
Corticosterone, Cortisol, the major OH: hydroxylase
a weak glucocorticoid glucocorticoid
Cortisol Adrenal androgens
Figure VII 4 2. Control of Steroid Hormone Synthesis in the
Figure VII 4 2. Control of Steroid Hormone Synthesis in the Zonas Fasciculata and Reticularis
Zonas Fasciculata and Reticularis
Synthesis in Zona Glomerulosa
• Although not physiologically
The pertinent hormone synthesized and secreted by the zona glomerulosa is relevant, note
aldosterone. As indicated above, activation of StAR is rate limiting, and SCC 11 deoxycorticosterone, a weak
activation is also important.
mineralocorticoid is synthesized
• Aldosterone secretion is stimulated by circulating Ang II and K+. and secreted from these zones of
the adrenal cortex. This compound
• Similar to cortisol, aldosterone requires the 21 β OH and 11 β OH
becomes very important when
enzymes. However, in contrast to cortisol, aldosterone does not require
activity of the 17 α OH enzyme. discussing congenital adrenal
hyperplasia.
• Also note the intermediate
17 hydroxyprogesterone, a
precursor for both cortisol and the
adrenal androgens. Measurement
of this compound is part of infant
screening because alterations
indicate possible enzyme
deficiencies in the adrenal cortex.
271
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 271 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Ang II or high K+
LDL
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences Second
messenger
Cholesterol
StAR and SCC
Pregnenolone
Microbiology
3 β HSD
Progesterone
21 β OH
11 Deoxycorticosterone
11 β OH
Corticosterone
Aldosterone
Aldosterone, the major
mineralocorticoid
Figure X 4 F4i.gurePathwVaIIy 4 3. PattohwaAyldostteoronAeldosterone SynStyhnesthisesis
PHYSIOLOGIC ACTIONS OF GLUCOCORTICOIDS
Stress
Stress includes states such as trauma, exposure to cold, illness, starvation, and
exercise. The capacity to withstand stress is dependent on adequate secretion of the
glucocorticoids.
Stress hormones usually act to mobilize energy stores. They include:
• Growth hormone mobilizes fatty acids by increasing lipolysis in adipose
tissue
• Glucagon mobilizes glucose by increasing liver glycogenolysis
• Cortisol mobilizes fat, protein, carbohydrate (see below)
• Epinephrine (in some forms of stress e.g., exercise) mobilizes glucose via
glycogenolysis and fat via lipolysis
All stress hormones raise plasma glucose. Severe hypoglycemia is a crisis and
causes a rapid increase in all stress hormones. By definition, because these
hormones raise plasma glucose, they are referred to as counterregulatory hor
mones (opposite to insulin).
A deficiency in a stress hormone may cause hypoglycemia.
272
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 272 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 4 | ADRENAL CORTEX
Metabolic Actions of Cortisol
Cortisol promotes the mobilization of energy stores, specifically:
• Protein: Cortisol promotes degradation and increased delivery of hepatic
gluconeogenic precursors.
• Lipids: Cortisol promotes lipolysis and increased delivery of free fatty
acids and glycerol.
• Carbohydrate: Cortisol raises blood glucose, making more glucose
available for nervous tissue. Two mechanisms are involved:
– Cortisol counteracts insulin’s action in most tissues (muscle, lymphoid,
and fat).
– Cortisol increases hepatic output of glucose by regulating the enzymes
involved in gluconeogenesis, particularly phosphoenolpyruvate car
boxykinase (PEPCK).
Permissive Actions of Cortisol
Cortisol enhances the capacity of glucagon and catecholamines, hence the
adjective permissive aptly describes many of the actions of cortisol.
• Glucagon promotes glycogenolysis in the liver (some lipolysis from
adipocytes as well). Without cortisol, fasting hypoglycemia rapidly
develops. Cortisol permits glucagon to raise blood glucose.
• Alpha receptor function is pivotal for blood pressure regulation (without
cortisol, blood pressure decreases). Beta receptor function involves
glucose regulation, lipolysis (see next chapter), and bronchodilation.
273
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 273 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
CONTROL OF ADRENOCORTICOTROPIN (ACTH) AND
CORTISOL SECRETION
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
+ Time of day input from
+ Stress
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN)
Microbiology
CRH
(–) Peak: Early morning
Low: Late evening
Optic
CRH: hypothala
Posterior chiasm
corticotropin re
pituitary
Anterior pituitary
(–) corticotrophs synthesize
Pro opiomelanocortin
ACTH β Lipotropin
Cortisol β MSH Endorphins
(modulate pain)
Figure VII 4 4. Control ofACTH and Cortisol
Figure X 4 6. Control of ACTH and Cortisol
Role of the Specific Modulators
Secretion of corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH) increases in response to
stress and in the early morning:
• Peak cortisol secretion occurs early in the morning between hours 6 and 8
of sleep. Secretion then declines slowly during the day and reaches a low
point late in the evening.
• Increased AM CRH = increased AM cortisol
• Increased AM cortisol = increased AM blood sugar and lipid levels
• Increased AM sugar and lipid levels help get you out of bed
274
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 274 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 4 | ADRENAL CORTEX
ACTH stimulates the secretion of cortisol (and adrenal androgens) of adrenal
cortex. Cortisol suppresses the release of ACTH by acting on the hypothalamus
and anterior pituitary.
Excessive secretion of ACTH (e.g., primary adrenal insufficiency) causes darken
ing of the skin. This is due to the melanocyte stimulating hormone (α MSH)
sequence within the ACTH molecule, and the β MSH activity of β lipotropin.
β lipotropin has a role not well understood. It is a precursor to β MSH and
endorphins. Endorphins modulate the perception of pain.
PHYSIOLOGIC ACTIONS OF ALDOSTERONE
The primary target tissue for aldosterone is the kidney, where it increases Na+
reabsorption by the principal cells of the kidney’s collecting ducts by increasing
ENaC and the activity of the Na+−K+ ATPase (see Renal section). Because water is
reabsorbed along with the Na+, aldosterone can be considered to control the
volume, rather than the concentration, of Na+.
Aldosterone also promotes the secretion of H+ by the intercalated cells of the
collecting duct, and K+ secretion by principal cells in the kidney. The Na+ con
serving action of aldosterone is also seen in salivary ducts, sweat glands, and the
distal colon.
The figure below shows the overall effects of aldosterone. This is a generalized
representation of the effect of aldosterone on the renal distal tubule/collecting duct
region.
Luminal Basal
membrane membrane
Aldosterone
Principal
ATPase
Na+ Na+ cell
Na+
K+ K+
ECF
H+ H+ HCO3 – HCO3 –
Intercalated
Carbonic Anhydrase cell
Filtrate H2O + CO2
Figure VII 4 5. Late Distal Tubule and Collecting Duct
Figure X 4 7. Late Distal Tubule and Collecting Duct
275
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 275 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
The specific actions of aldosterone are as follows:
• Promotes the activity of Na/K ATPase–dependent pump that moves Na+
into the renal ECF in exchange for K+
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences • Enhances epithelial Na+ channels (ENaC) in the luminal membrane of
principal cells; net effect is to increase Na+ reabsorption, which in turn
increases water reabsorption
• Regulates Na+ to regulate extracellular volume; the reabsorption of
Microbiology Na+ creates a negative luminal potential promoting K+ excretion
• Stimulates H+ secretion by intercalated cells; thus, excess aldosterone
causes alkalosis, while insufficient aldosterone causes acidosis
(type IV RTA)
Table VII 4 1. Actions of Aldosterone
Renal
Na+ reabsorption ↑ total body Na+
K+ secretion ↓ plasma [K+]
H+ secretion promotes metabolic
alkalosis
HCO3− production promotes metabolic
alkalosis
H2O reabsorption volume expansion
CONTROL OF ALDOSTERONE SECRETION
Acutely, ACTH increases aldosterone secretion. However, the primary regulators
of aldosterone secretion are circulating levels of Ang II and K+.
Sensory Input—the Juxtaglomerular Apparatus
The main sensory cells are the granular cells (also called juxtamedullary cells) of
the afferent arteriole. They are modified smooth muscle cells that surround and
directly monitor the pressure in the afferent arteriole. This signal in many cases is
in response to a reduction in circulating fluid volume.
These cells are also innervated and stimulated by sympathetic neurons via
norepinephrine and β 1 receptors. Thus the release of renin induced by hypovole
mia is enhanced by increased sympathetic neural activity.
Additional sensory input is from the macula densa cells of the distal tubule. They
perceive sodium delivery to the distal nephron and communicate with the
juxtaglomerular cells.
276
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 276 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 4 | ADRENAL CORTEX
Proximal tubule
Glomerular basement
Basement membrane
membrane
of Bowman’s capsule
Glomerular capillary
epithelium
Glomerular epithelium
Epithelium of
Bowman’s capsule
Efferent
arteriole Granular (juxtamedullary) cells
Afferent
arteriole
Blood flow
Distal Macula
tubule densa
Figure VII4 6. Renal Corpuscle and Juxtaglomerular Apparatus
Figure X 4 8. Renal Corpuscle and Juxtaglomerular Apparatus
Long Term Regulation of Blood Pressure and Cardiac Output by the
Renin Angiotensin Aldosterone System
Long term regulation of blood pressure and cardiac output is accomplished by the
renin angiotensin aldosterone system.
Blood pressure is monitored by the juxtaglomerular apparatus. When renal
perfusion pressure decreases, secretion of renin increases; conversely, when
pressure increases, renin secretion is suppressed. Renin is an enzyme that converts
angiotensinogen, a circulating protein produced in the liver, into angiotensin I.
Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE), found mainly in endothelial cells of
pulmonary vessels, converts angiotensin I into angiotensin II. Angiotensin II has
potent effects to stimulate secretion of aldosterone and to cause arteriolar
vasoconstriction. It also directly stimulates reabsorption of sodium in the proximal
tubule.
MAP = CO × TPR
This system regulates both resistance, via vasoconstriction, and cardiac output, via
preload. Since aldosterone also causes increased renal excretion of potassium, it
affects plasma potassium concentration. Plasma potassium strongly stimulates
secretion of aldosterone, so this constitutes a negative feedback control system for
plasma potassium concentration.
277
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 277 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Volume depleted states tend to produce metabolic alkalosis, in part because
aldosterone increases to compensate for the volume loss; the aldosterone increase
stimulates excretion of acid and addition of bicarbonate to the plasma.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
• Decreased pressure in renal afferent arteriole;
• Decreased Na+ delivery to macula densa of distal convoluted tubule
• Increased β1 noradrenergic input to the juxtaglomerular cells
Microbiology
Juxtaglomerular cells (baroreceptors) secrete
(–)
RENIN (enzyme)
Angiotensinogen
an α 2 globulin Angiotensin I (10aa)
Prohormone
synthesized in liver
Angiotensin converting
Blocked by
aliskiren enzyme (ACE)
Increasing
Angiotensin II (8aa)
blood pressure
Vasoconstrictive
action
Blocked
Zona glomerulosa
by ARBs
Blocked by
Increased
spironolactone
cardiac output
and eplerenone
Aldosterone
Increased Na+ Increased
Reabsorption + H2O plasma volume
Figure VII 4 7. Feedback Control of Blood Pressure by Renin Angiotensin Aldosterone System
Figure X 4 9. Feedback Control of Blood Pressure by Renin Angiotensin Aldosterone System
Any of the 3 stimuli listed at the top of the figure produces an increase in the secre
tion of renin and circulating angiotensin II. Angiotensin II raises blood pressure by
2 independent actions:
• The direct vasoconstrictive effects of angiotensin II increase TPR.
• It stimulates the adrenal cortex to secrete aldosterone, resulting in
increased reabsorption of Na+.
As Na+ reabsorption is increased, so is water. This increases the volume of the ECF,
thus raising cardiac output and blood pressure.
278
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 278 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 4 | ADRENAL CORTEX
An increase in blood pressure suppresses the renin angiotensin aldosterone
system (RAAS). This decrease in angiotensin II reduces TPR. Reduced activity of
aldosterone causes a urinary loss of sodium and water, lowering cardiac output.
In addition to its effects to serve as a direct vasoconstrictor and increase aldoste
rone secretion, angiotensin II also:
• Increases ADH release from posterior pituitary
• Increases thirst
• Increases sodium reabsorption in proximal tubule
Potassium Effect
In addition to angiotensin II, elevated plasma K+ also increases aldosterone. This is
negative feedback regulation of K+ (see Renal Section).
GLUCOCORTICOID DISORDERS
The first step in the evaluation of possible hypercortisolism is establishment that
the cortisol level is truly elevated. Once that is done, ACTH and high dose
dexamethasone suppression tests are used to determine the source/etiology of the
hypercortisolism.
Cushing syndrome is hypercortisolism regardless of origin, even chronic gluco
corticoid therapy. Cushing disease is hypercortisolism due to an adenoma of the
anterior pituitary (microadenoma).
Establishing the Presence of Hypercortisolism
First do a 24 hour urine free cortisol or 1 mg overnight dexamethasone suppres
sion test. A single random cortisol level should not be used to diagnose hypercor
tisolism.
A 24 hour urine free cortisol is harder to do but it has fewer false positive results.
• 1 mg overnight dexamethasone suppression test is used to test for the
presence of Cushing syndrome, regardless of the cause.
– Cortisol decreases: normal
– Cortisol does not decrease: hypercortisolism
– False positives from depression or alcoholism
• High dose dexamethasone test is used to differentiate pituitary adenoma
from ectopic ACTH secretion and adrenal tumors.
– Cortisol decreases: pituitary source
– Cortisol does not decrease: ectopic ACTH, adrenal tumor
279
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 279 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
• ACTH is used after 24 hour urine cortisol establishes presence of hyper
cortisolism.
– ACTH levels establish etiology of hypercortisolism
NOTE
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences – ACTH low = adrenal source of cortisol overproduction
Hypercortisolism + ACTH that is in normal
– ACTH normal or high = pituitary or ectopic source
range or high is considered a secondary
– High dose dexamethasone distinguishes pituitary vs. ectopic source
condition.
Microbiology • Via negative feedback, a high cortisol
Stimulation Tests
should produce a low ACTH.
ACTH stimulation test diagnoses adrenal insufficiency.
• IfACTH is in normal range, then it is
• To diagnose atrophied adrenal nonresponsive
“inappropriately” normal, i.e., it is too
• Cortisol increases after ACTH: normal
high, and is thus the cause of the
hypercortisolism. • No change in cortisol level: adrenal insufficiency
CLINICAL CORRELATE Hypercortisolism
Metyrapone testing is no longer performed.
Primary hypercortisolism (adrenal source)
• Metyrapone is no longer manufactured
• ACTH independent
• Simulates 11 beta hydroxylase
• Cortisol elevated, ACTH depressed
deficiency; ifACTH rises that is normal,
• Most are benign adrenocortical adenomas.
but ifit fails to rise that suggests
pituitary insufficiency • Adrenal adenoma usually unilateral and secretes only cortisol; decreased
adrenal androgen and deoxycorticosterone (hirsutism absent)
• Presence of androgen or mineralocorticoid excess suggests a carcinoma.
Secondary hypercortisolism (pituitary vs. ectopic source)
• ACTH dependent
• Hypersecretion of ACTH results in bilateral hyperplasia of the adrenal
zona fasciculata and reticularis.
• Elevated ACTH, cortisol, adrenal androgen, deoxycorticosterone
• Two main subcategories:
– Pituitary adenoma, usually a microadenoma (<1 cm), is Cushing
disease; increased ACTH not sufficient to cause hyperpigmentation;
dexamethasone suppressible.
– Ectopic ACTH syndrome, seen most often in patients with small cell
carcinoma of the lung; greater secretion of ACTH than in Cushing
disease; hyperpigmentation often present; ectopic site nonsuppressible
with dexamethasone
280
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 280 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 4 | ADRENAL CORTEX
Differential diagnosis
• Hypercortisolism established by lack of cortisol suppression to 1 mg
overnight dexamethasone and/or elevated 24 hour urine free cortisol
• Decreased plasma ACTH: Adrenal is source (primary hypercortisolism)
• High dose dexamethasone
– ACTH suppressed = Cushing disease (pituitary source)
– ACTH not suppressed = ectopic ACTH syndrome
Characteristics of Cushing syndrome
• Obesity because of hyperphagia, classically central affecting mainly the
face, neck, trunk, and abdomen: “moon facies” and “buffalo hump”
• Protein depletion as a result of excessive protein catabolism
• Inhibition of inflammatory response and poor wound healing
• Hyperglycemia leads to hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance.
• Hyperlipidemia
• Bone breakdown and osteoporosis
• Thinning of the skin with wide purple striae located around abdomen and
hips
• Increased adrenal androgens, when present in women, can result in acne,
mild hirsutism, and amenorrhea. In men, decreased libido and impotence.
• Mineralocorticoid effects of the high level of glucocorticoid and deoxycor
ticosterone lead to salt and water retention (hypertension), potassium
depletion, and a hypokalemic alkalosis.
• Increased thirst and polyuria
• Anxiety, depression, and other emotional disorders may be present.
Hypocortisolism
Primary hypocortisolism (in primary adrenal insufficiency,
Addison’s disease)
Cortisol deficiency leads to weakness, fatigue, anorexia, weight loss, hypotension,
hyponatremia, hypoglycemia. Increases in ACTH result in hyperpigmentation of
skin and mucous membranes.
Aldosterone deficiency leads to sodium wasting and hyponatremia, potassium
retention and hyperkalemia, dehydration, hypotension, and acidosis.
• Autoimmune origin with slow onset in about 80% of cases
• Loss of 90% of both adrenals required before obvious clinical manifesta
tions
281
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 281 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
• With gradual adrenal destruction, basal secretion is normal but secretion
does not respond to stress, which may initiate an adrenal crisis.
• Bilateral hemorrhage as the origin results in an adrenal crisis. Hyperpig
mentation, hyponatremia, and hyperkalemia usually absent
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
• Orthostatic intolerance due to diminished alpha receptor function and
low blood volume.
• Abnormalities in GI function
Microbiology • Loss of axillary and pubic hair in women due to loss of androgens,
amenorrhea
• Insufficient glucocorticoids lead to hypoglycemia and an inability of the
kidney to excrete a water load
• Severe hypoglycemia in children but rare in adults
Secondary hypocortisolism (secondary adrenal insufficiency)
• Most commonly due to sudden withdrawal of exogenous glucocorticoid
therapy
• Trauma, infection, and infarction most common natural origin of ACTH
deficiency
• In the early stages baseline hormone values are normal but ACTH reserve
compromised and stress response subnormal (glucocorticoids adminis
tered presurgery)
• May be associated with the loss of other anterior pituitary hormones
(panhypopituitarism) or adenomas secreting prolactin or growth
hormone
• Atrophy of the zona fasciculata and zona reticularis
• Zona glomerulosa and aldosterone normal; no manifestations of mineralo
corticoid deficiency
• Consequences as stated for cortisol deficiency
• Severe hypoglycemia and severe hypotension unusual (RAAS is still
intact)
• Hyponatremia due to water retention
Differential diagnosis
• Rapid ACTH stimulation test: initial procedure in the assessment of
adrenal insufficiency (both primary and secondary)
– Increased cortisol: normal
– Diminished increased cortisol: hypocortisolism
• Normal responsiveness of ACTH test does not exclude decreased pituitary
reserve and decreased response to stress (insulin infusion)
• In same sample, a normal aldosterone would be evidence of a secondary
problem
• Definitive test for primary vs. secondary is ACTH: ↑ primary hypocorti
solism (Addison’s); inappropriately low in secondary hypocortisolism
282
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 282 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 4 | ADRENAL CORTEX
Table VII 4 2. Primary and Secondary Disorders of Cortisol Secretion
Plasma Plasma
Disorder Cortisol ACTH Hyperpigmentation
Primary hypercortisolism ↑ ↓ no
Secondary hypercortisolism
Cushing disease ↑ normal or no
↑
Ectopic ACTH ↑ ↑ yes (maybe)
Primary hypocortisolism ↓ ↑ yes
Secondary hypocortisolism ↓ ↓ no
MINERALOCORTICOID DISORDERS
Hyperaldosteronism with Hypertension
Primary hyperaldosteronism (Conn’s syndrome) is caused by a small unilateral
adenoma on either side (most common); bilateral adrenal hyperplasia (idiopathic
hyperaldosteronism); or adrenal carcinoma (rare).
Detection of hypertension with hypokalemia is often the initial clue for Conn’s
syndrome.
• Increased whole body sodium, fluid, and circulating blood volume
• Infrequent hypernatremia
• Increased peripheral vasoconstriction and TPR
• Blood pressure (from borderline to severe hypertension)
• Edema (rare) (sodium escape, i.e., a major increase in sodium and water
retention is prevented by “sodium escape” but mechanism unclear)
• Modest left ventricular hypertrophy
• Potassium depletion and hypokalemia (causing weakness and fatigue)
• Increased hydrogen ion excretion and new bicarbonate create metabolic
alkalosis.
• Positive Chvostek or Trousseau’s sign (suggestive of alkalosis leading to
low calcium)
• Normal cortisol level
• Suppressed renin (major feature)
Secondary hyperaldosteronism refers to a state in which there is an appropriate
increase in aldosterone in response to activation of the renin angiotensin system.
283
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 283 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Secondary hyperaldosteronism with hypertension includes the following
features:
• Primary oversecretion of renin, secondary to a decrease in renal blood
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences flow and/or pressure (most cases)
• Renal arterial stenosis, narrowing via atherosclerosis, fibromuscular
hyperplasia
• Renin secreting tumor (rare)
Microbiology
• Modest to highly elevated renin and aldosterone
• Hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis
Differential diagnosis
• Hypokalemia in a hypertensive patient not taking diuretics
• Hyposecretion of renin with elevated aldosterone that fails to respond to a
volume contraction: Conn’s syndrome
• Hypersecretion of renin with elevated aldosterone: renal vascular
Hyperaldosteronism with Hypotension
Secondary hyperaldosteronism with hypotension includes the following
features:
• Sequestration of blood on the venous side of the systemic circulation
(common cause)
• This results in decreased cardiac output and thus decreased blood flow
and pressure in the renal artery.
• The following conditions produce secondary hyperaldosteronism through
this mechanism:
– Congestive heart failure
– Constriction of the vena cava
– Hepatic cirrhosis
Table VII 4 3. Secondary Hyperaldosteronism
The cause in all cases is a decrease in blood pressure.
1. Plasma renin and angiotensin II activity: The increased angio ↑
tensin II activity will drive the secondary hyperaldosteronism.
2. Total body sodium: ↑
3. ECF volume: ↑
4. Plasma volume: ↑
5. Edema*: yes
*Na+ escape prevents peripheral edema in primary but not secondary hyperaldosteron
ism. Also note that the increased ECF volume remains mainly on the venous side of
the circulation, accentuating the venous congestion and preventing a return of
circulating blood volume to normal.
284
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 284 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 4 | ADRENAL CORTEX
ENZYME DEFICIENCIES
Single enzyme defects can occur as congenital “inborn errors of metabolism.”
Congenital defects in any of the enzymes lead to deficient cortisol secretion and
the syndrome called congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Hyperplasia is caused by the
excessive secretion of ACTH that results from the loss of the negative feedback
action of cortisol.
In all the following examples, assume the deficiency is significant to the extent that
it affects normal hormonal production, but is not a complete blockade.
A useful summary of enzyme deficiency conditions is that a horizontal cut of the
pathway causes decreased production of all substances below the cut and increased
secretion of substances above the cut. A vertical cut causes decrease of substances
to the right of the cut and increase of substances to the left of the cut.
21 β Hydroxylase Deficiency
21 β hydroxylase deficiency is the most common of the congenital enzyme
deficiencies.
Tissues affected: zona glomerulosa, zona fasciculata, zona reticularis
Effect in the zona glomerulosa
The blockade point in the zona glomerulosa can be seen below.
Ang II or high K+
LDL
Second
messenger
Cholesterol
StAR and SCC
Pregnenolone
3 β HSD
Progesterone
21 β OH
11 Deoxycorticosterone
11 β OH
Corticosterone
Aldosterone
Aldosterone, the major
mineralocorticoid
Figure VII 4 8. 21 β Enzyme Deficiency in the Zona Glomerulosa
Figure X 4 10. 21 β Enzyme Deficiency in the Zona Glomerulosa
285
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 285 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Consequence: Result is a decreased production of aldosterone, the main
mineralocorticoid.
Cholesterol can be made “de novo” from acetate if there is nutritional deficiency.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Effect in the zona fasciculata and zona reticularis
The 2 blockade points (wavy lines) in the zona fasciculata and zona reticularis can
be seen below.
Microbiology
Pituitary
(–)
ACTH
LDL cAMP
17,20 lyase
17 α hydroxylase (17,20)
Adrenal androgens
(17 α OH)
Cholesterol StAR and SCC 17 OH Steroids 17 Ketosteroids
17 α OH (17,20) Dehydroepiandro
Pregnenolone 17 Hydroxypregnenolone
sterone (DHEA)
3 β HSD 3 β HSD
3 β HSD
17 α OH (17,20)
Progesterone 17 Hydroxyprogesterone
Androstenedione
21 β OH
21 β OH (A)
11 deoxycorticosterone,
11 Deoxycortisol
a weak mineralocorticoid
11 β OH
11 β OH
Cortisol, the major
Corticosterone,
glucocorticoid
a weak glucocorticoid
Cortisol Adrenal androgens
Figure VII 4 9. 21 β Enzyme Deficiency in the Zona Fasciculata and Zona Reticularis
Figure X 4 11. 21 β Enzyme Deficiency in the Zona Fasciculata and Zona Reticularis
Summary of overall pathway changes:
• Zona glomerulosa: decreased aldosterone
• Zona fasciculata, reticularis: decreased production of 11
deoxycorticosterone, a weak mineralocorticoid
• Therefore, a mineralocorticoid deficiency, loss of Na+, volume and a
hypotensive state (salt wasting state)
• Increased renin secretion and increased circulating angiotensin II
• Decreased production of corticosterone, a weak glucocorticoid, and
cortisol
• Therefore, glucocorticoid deficiency and increased ACTH, which drive
increases in adrenal androgen secretion
286
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 286 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 4 | ADRENAL CORTEX
Consequences of 21 β hydroxylase deficiency
21 β hydroxylase deficiency accounts for ~90% of cases.
• Mineralocorticoid deficiency seen in 75% of cases
• Neonates may present with salt wasting crisis; salt wasters tend to have
hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and raised plasma renin
• Elevated 17 hydroxyprogesterone
• Increased androgens, leading to virilization of the female fetus and sexual
ambiguity at birth
• Males are phenotypically normal at birth but develop precocious pseudo
puberty, growth acceleration, premature epiphyseal plate closure, and
diminished final height
• Treatment is aimed at bringing glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid back
to normal range, which also suppresses adrenal androgen secretion; in
addition, hydrocortisone to act as feedback inhibition on pituitary
11 β Hydroxylase Deficiency
Tissues affected: zona fasciculata, zona reticularis, zona glomerulosa
Effect in the zona fasciculata and zona reticularis
The blockade in the zona fasciculata and zona reticularis can be seen below.
Pituitary
(–)
ACTH
LDL cAMP
17,20 lyase
17 α hydroxylase (17,20)
Adrenal androgens
(17 α OH)
Cholesterol StAR and SCC 17 OH Steroids 17 Ketosteroids
17 α OH (17,20) Dehydroepiandro
Pregnenolone 17 Hydroxypregnenolone
sterone (DHEA)
3 β HSD 3 β HSD
3 β HSD
17 α OH (17,20)
Progesterone 17 Hydroxyprogesterone
Androstenedione (A)
21 β OH 21 β OH
11 deoxycorticosterone, 11 Deoxycortisol
a weak mineralocorticoid
11 β OH
11 β OH
Corticosterone, Cortisol, the major
a weak glucocorticoid glucocorticoid
Cortisol Adrenal androgens
Figure VII 4 10. 11 β Hydroxylase Deficiency in the Zona Fasciculata and Zona Reticularis
Figure X 4 12. 11 β Hydroxylase Deficiency in the Zona Fasciculata and Zona Reticularis
287
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 287 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Deoxycorticosterone increases blood pressure. Only cortisol is feedback inhibition
of the pituitary for ACTH.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences Effect in the zona glomerulosa
The effect on the zona glomerulosa can be seen below.
Microbiology
Ang II ↓
due
LDL to
Second
hypertension
messenger
Cholesterol StAR and SCC
Pregnenolone
3 β HSD
Progesterone
21 β OH
11 Deoxycorticosterone
11 β OH
Second
Corticosterone
messenger
Ang II
Aldosterone, the major Aldosterone ↓
mineralocorticoid
Figure VII 4 11. 11 β Hydroxylase Deficiency in the Zona Glomerulosa
Figure X 4 13. 11 β Hydroxylase Deficiency in the Zona Glomerulosa
Summary of overall pathway changes:
• Zona fasciculata, reticularis: decreased corticosterone and cortisol,
increased ACTH and overproduction of steroids above the blockade,
including:
– Androgens and the consequences in women and prepubertal males
– 11 deoxycorticosterone, a mineralocorticoid that leads to hypertension
and a decrease in circulating angiotensin II
• Zona glomerulosa: decreased aldosterone because of loss of necessary
enzyme and low angiotensin II
Consequences of 11 β hydroxylase deficiency
• Clinical features of increased androgens similar to the preceding form,
including virilization of female fetus
• Principal difference with this form is the hypertension produced by
11 deoxycorticosterone, along with hypokalemia and suppressed renin
secretion
• Treatment for all forms of CAH is glucocorticoids such as hydrocortisone
and dexamethasone
288
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 288 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 4 | ADRENAL CORTEX
17 α Hydroxylase Deficiency
Tissues affected: zona fasciculata, zona reticularis, testis, ovary
Blockade in the adrenal zona fasciculata and the zona reticularis
The blockade points in the zona fasciculata and zona reticularis can be seen below.
Pituitary
(–)
ACTH
LDL cAMP
17,20 lyase
17 α hydroxylase (17,20) Adrenal androgens
(17 α OH)
Cholesterol StAR and SCC 17 OH Steroids 17 Ketosteroids
17α OH
(17,20)
Dehydroepiandro
Pregnenolone 17 Hydroxypregnenolone
sterone (DHEA)
3 β HSD 3 β HSD
17α OH 3 β HSD
(17,20)
Progesterone 17 Hydroxyprogesterone
Androstene
21 β OH 21 β OH dione (A)
11 Deoxycorticosterone,
11 Deoxycortisol
a weak mineralocorticoid
11 β OH 11 β OH
Corticosterone, Cortisol, the major
a weak glucocorticoid glucocorticoid
Cortisol Adrenal androgens
Figure VII 4 12. 17 α Hydroxylase Deficiency
Figure X 4 14. 17 α Hydroxylase Deficiency
Summary of overall pathway changes:
• Zona fasciculata, reticularis: decreased adrenal androgens, decreased
cortisol, and increased ACTH. Increased 11 deoxycorticosterone leading
to hypertension. The reduced circulating angiotensin II reduces stimula
tion of zona glomerulosa and aldosterone secretion.
289
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 289 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Effect in the testes
The blockade points in the testes can be seen below.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
17 α OH
Dehydroepiandrosterone
Cholesterol Pregnenolone 17 Hydroxypreg. (DHEA)
Microbiology
Progesterone 17 Hydroxyprog.
Androstenedione (A)
Testosterone
Figure FXigur4e 15V.II 4Te1st3i.culaTresticular 1717ααOOHH DDefeifciiceinencycy
Summary: decreased production of all androgens including testosterone
Effect in the ovaries
The blockade points in the ovaries can be seen below.
17 α OH
Dehydroepiandrosterone
Cholesterol Pregnenolone 17 Hydroxypreg. (DHEA)
Progesterone 17 Hydroxyprog.
Androstenedione (A)
Testosterone
Estrogen
Figure FXigur4e 16V.II4Ov1a4r.ianOvarian1717ααOOHH DDefeicfiiceinecnycy
Summary: decreased production of estrogens and androgens
Consequences of 17 α hydroxylase deficiency
• Extremely rare
• Usually diagnosed at time of puberty when patient presents with hyper
tension, hypokalemia, and hypogonadism
• Eunuchoid characteristics
290
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 290 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 4 | ADRENAL CORTEX
Summary
Table VII 4 4. Enzyme Deficiencies
Mineralocorticoid
Deficiency Glucocorticoid ACTH Blood Pressure Aldo DOC Androgen Estrogen
21 β OH ↓ ↑ ↓ ↓ ↓ ↑ adrenal _
_
11 β OH ↓ ↑ ↑ ↓ ↑ ↑ adrenal
17 α OH ↓ ↑ ↑ ↓ ↑ ↓ adrenal & ↓
testicular
Note: In all 3 disorders, there will be a deficiency in cortisol and an increase in circulating ACTH. The ACTH is
responsible for the adrenal hyperplasia.
Recall Question
Which of the following would be seen on laboratory examination of
a patient suffering from primary hypercortisolism?
A. Decreased plasma cortisol, decreased plasma ACTH, without
hyperpigmentation
B. Decreased plasma cortisol, increased plasma ACTH, with
hyperpigmentation
C. Increased plasma cortisol, increased plasma ACTH, with
hyperpigmentation
D. Increased plasma cortisol, increased plasma ACTH, without
hyperpigmentation
E. Increased plasma cortisol, decreased plasma ACTH, without
hyperpigmentation
Answer: E
291
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 291 15/10/22 2:21P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 292 15/10/22 2:21P
5#
Adrenal Medulla
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Answer questions about hormones of the adrenal medulla
❏ Demonstrate understanding of major metabolic actions of epinephrine
❏ Interpret scenarios on pheochromocytomas
HORMONES OF THE ADRENAL MEDULLA
Secretion of the adrenal medulla is 20% norepinephrine and 80% epinephrine.
Phenylethanolamine N methyltransferase (PNMT) converts norepinephrine into
epinephrine.
• The half life of the catecholamines is only 2 minutes. Metabolic end prod
ucts include metanephrines and vanillylmandelic acid (VMA), both of
which can be measured in plasma and urine.
• Removal of the adrenal medulla reduces plasma epinephrine to very low
levels but does not alter plasma norepinephrine. Most circulating norepi
nephrine arises from postganglionic sympathetic neurons.
• Because many of the actions of epinephrine are also mediated by norepi
nephrine, the adrenal medulla is not essential for life.
• The vasoconstrictive action of norepinephrine is essential for the mainte
nance of normal blood pressure, especially when an individual is standing.
Plasma norepinephrine levels double when one goes from a lying to a
standing position. People with inadequate production of norepinephrine
suffer from orthostatic hypotension.
• Epinephrine is a stress hormone and rapidly increases in response to
exercise, exposure to cold, emergencies, and hypoglycemia.
MAJOR METABOLIC ACTIONS OF EPINEPHRINE
• Liver: Epinephrine increases the activity of liver and muscle phosphory
lase, promoting glycogenolysis. This increases glucose output by the liver.
• Skeletal muscle: Epinephrine promotes glycogenolysis but because muscle
lacks glucose 6 phosphatase, glucose cannot be released by skeletal
muscle; instead, it must be metabolized at least to lactate before being
released into the circulation.
• Adipose tissue: Epinephrine increases lipolysis in adipose tissue by
increasing the activity of hormone sensitive lipase. Glycerol from TG
breakdown is a minor substrate for gluconeogenesis.
• Epinephrine increases the metabolic rate. This will not occur without
thyroid hormones or the adrenal cortex.
293
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 293 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Metabolic Actions of Epinephrine on CHO and Fat
LIVER
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Increased Available for re entry into
Glycogenolysis muscle as an energy source
and for recycling into lactate
Microbiology
G 6 Phosphate Plasma
glucose
Glycogen
Increased
Gluconeogenesis MUSCLE
Increased muscle
glycogenolysis
Plasma lactate Pyruvate
Glycerol, a minor substrate
for gluconeogenesis
Increased free fatty acids become
available as an energy source
Increased
Lipolysis
Epinephrine stimulates increased lipolysis
by increasing the activity of hormone sensitive
lipase in adipose tissue.
Triglycerides
ADIPOSE TISSUE
Figure VII 5 1. Actions of Catecholamines
Figure X 5 1. Actions of Catecholamines
294
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 294 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 5 | ADRENAL MEDULLA
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMAS
Pheochromocytomas are adrenal tumors that secrete epinephrine and norepineph
rine in various ratios. They are usually unilateral and benign.
• Characteristic of MEN 2A and MEN 2B
• Paragangliomas are extra adrenal pheochromocytomas of sympathetic
ganglia located primarily within the abdomen and that secrete norepi
nephrine.
• Most consistent feature is hypertension. Symptoms include headache,
diaphoresis, palpitations, and anxiety. Increased metabolic rate and
hyperglycemia also occur.
• Pheochromocytomas are highly vascular and encapsulated.
• Episodic release of hormone, particularly when it is mainly norepineph
rine, can abruptly cause a hypertensive crisis. Can be induced by physical
stimuli that displace abdominal contents.
• Most reliable initial test is plasma metanephrines or 24 hour urine
catecholamines or metanephrines.
• Usually curable but can be fatal if undiagnosed
• Treat with alpha blocker followed by surgical removal.
295
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 295 15/10/22 2:21P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 296 15/10/22 2:21P
6#
Endocrine Pancreas
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Use knowledge of hormones of the islets of Langerhans
❏ Use knowledge of actions of insulin
❏ Use knowledge of control of insulin secretion
❏ Explain information related to actions of glucagon
❏ Answer questions about control of glucagon secretion
❏ Use knowledge of diabetes mellitus
❏ Answer questions about pancreatic endocrine secreting tumors
HORMONES OF THE ISLETS OF LANGERHANS
The location and proportion of each major hormone secreting cell type of the
islets of Langerhans are shown below. The local inhibitory paracrine action of each
islet hormone is shown by dashed arrows. The diameter of each circle
approximately represents the proportion of that cell type present in the islets.
297
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 297 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
CLINICAL CORRELATE
For many years, Cpeptide was considered to
Delta cells, which
have no biological function, but more
constitute about 5% –
Pathologryecently this has been caBlleehdavioraiSlnctioenceq/uSeosctiiaoSlnc.iences
of the islet cells, are
Alpha cells, which
Studies suggest that C peptide receptors interspersed between
constitute about 20%
exist on cells. In addition, C peptide may the alpha and beta
of the islet cells, secrete
cells and secrete
serve a protective role, helping to prevent glucagon and tend to
somatostatin.
Microbiolothgey renal, neural, and microvascular be located near the
periphery of the islet.
pathologies seen when it is absent, i.e., type
Idiabetes mellitus. –
–
Beta cells constitute
60–75% of the islet
cells. Beta cells synthesize preproinsulin,
Glucagon
which is cleaved to form proinsulin,
which, in turn, splits into insulin and
C peptide—both of which are secreted
in equimolar quantities.
Insulin
Blood flows first to capillaries in the
center of the islet and picks up insulin.
Blood then flows to the periphery of the
islets, where it acts on alpha cells
to inhibit glucagon secretion. C peptide: long term
marker of endogenous
insulin secretion
Figure VII 6 1. Hormones of the Pancreatic Islets
Figure X 6 1. Hormones of the Pancreatic Islets
298
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 298 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 6 | ENDOCRINE PANCREAS
C Peptide
Proinsulin
s s A
s
s
s
s B
C Peptide
Insulin s s A
s
s
s
B
FigurFeigureVII 6 2X. In6suli2n. Insulin
ACTIONS OF INSULIN
Insulin Receptor
The portion of the insulin receptor that faces externally has the hormone binding
domain. The portion of the insulin receptor that faces the cytosol has tyrosine
kinase activity.
When occupied by insulin, the receptor phosphorylates itself and other pro
teins (see Biochemistry Lecture Notes)
Peripheral Uptake of Glucose
Glucose is taken up by peripheral tissues by facilitated diffusion. Insulin facilitates
this uptake in some tissues. Typically the insulin receptor causes the insertion of
glucose transporters in the membrane.
Tissues that require insulin for effective uptake of glucose are the following:
• Adipose tissue
• Resting skeletal muscle (although glucose can enter working muscle
without the aid of insulin)
• Liver because of glucokinase stimulation
Tissues in which glucose uptake is not affected by insulin are the following:
• Nervous tissue
• Kidney tubules
• Intestinal mucosa
• Red blood cells
• β cells of pancreas
299
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 299 15/10/22 2:21PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Metabolic Actions of Insulin
Insulin is a major anabolic hormone, and it is secreted in response to a carbohy
drate and/or protein containing meal.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Anabolic hormones tend to promote protein synthesis (increase lean body mass).
Other anabolic hormones include the following:
• Thyroid hormones
• Growth hormone/IGF I
Microbiology
• Sex steroids (androgens)
Effects of insulin on carbohydrate metabolism
Insulin increases the uptake of glucose and its metabolism in muscle and fat. By
increasing glucose uptake in muscle, its metabolism increases, i.e., its conversion
to carbon dioxide and water is increased.
Insulin increases glycogen synthesis in liver and muscle.
• The activity of those enzymes that promote glycogen synthesis
(glucokinase and glycogen synthetase) is increased.
• The activity of those enzymes that promote glycogen breakdown
(phosphorylase and glucose 6 phosphatase) is decreased.
Glucokinase and glucose 6 phosphatase are expressed by the liver but not by
muscle.
Effects of insulin on protein metabolism
• Insulin increases amino acid uptake by muscle cells.
• Insulin increases protein synthesis.
• Insulin decreases protein breakdown (deficiency of insulin results in a
breakdown of protein).
Effects of insulin on fat metabolism
Insulin increases:
• Glucose uptake by fat cells (increases membrane transporters). By increas
ing glucose uptake, insulin also makes triose phosphates available for
triglyceride synthesis in adipose tissue.
• Triglyceride uptake by fat cells. It increases the activity of lipoprotein
lipase. Lipoprotein lipase is located on the endothelium of capillaries, and
it catalyzes the release of free fatty acids from triglycerides.
• Triglyceride synthesis (lipogenesis) in adipose tissue and liver by stimulat
ing the rate limiting step, namely the carboxylation of acetyl CoA to malo
nyl CoA. In other words, insulin stimulates the conversion of carbohydrate
into fat.
300
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 300 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 6 | ENDOCRINE PANCREAS
Glucose G 6 P
TG
LPL
TG FFA LPL = lipoprotein lipase
HSL = hormone sensitive lipase
HSL
LPL= Lipoprotein lipase
FFA HSL = Hormone sensitive lipase
+ FFA
Glycerol
Figure VII 6 3. The Adipose Cell
Figure X 6 3. The Adipose Cell
Insulin decreases:
• Triglyceride breakdown (lipolysis) in adipose tissue by decreasing the
activity of hormone sensitive lipase; this enzyme is activated by stress
hormones (i.e., cortisol, growth hormone, epinephrine [glucagon])
• Formation of ketone bodies by the liver
Insulin Effects on Potassium
Insulin promotes K+ movement into cells. Although the overall process is not well
understood, insulin increases the activity of Na/K ATPase in most body tissues.
This K+ lowering action of insulin is used to treat acute, life threatening
hyperkalemia. For example, sometimes the hyperkalemia of renal failure is
successfully lowered by the simultaneous administration of insulin and glucose.
(The glucose is given to prevent severe insulin induced hypoglycemia from
developing.)
It does not work as quickly as calcium chloride, which is instantaneous, in
protecting the heart from arrhythmias. Insulin and glucose administration is faster
than Na+/K+ cation exchange resins such as Kayexalate. Kayexalate is taken into
the GI tract orally but needs 6–12 hours to lower potassium levels.
301
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 301 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Summary
LIVER
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Increased
• Glycogenesis
• Protein synthesis
• Lipogenesis
Microbiology Decreased
• Glycogenolysis
• Gluconeogenesis
• Ketogenesis Increased
• Ureagenesis MUSCLE • Glycogenesis
• Protein synthesis
• Glucose oxidation
INCREASED
UPTAKE OF: Decreased
• Glycogenolysis
Glucose • Proteolysis
Some amino acids
Some fatty acids
K+
Increased
Lipogenesis
Decreased
Lipolysis
ADIPOSE TISSUE
Figure VII 6 4. Major Actions of Insulin
Figure X 6 4. Major Actions of Insulin
302
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 302 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 6 | ENDOCRINE PANCREAS
CONTROL OF INSULIN SECRETION BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
The most important controller of insulin secretion is plasma glucose. Above a Sulfonylurea derivatives block the ATP
threshold of 100 mg%, insulin secretion is directly proportional to plasma glucose. sensitive K+ channels and thus increase
insulin secretion.
Glucose enters the cell, causing a rise in intracellular ATP that closes ATP sensi
tive K+ channels.
Closure of the ATP sensitive K+ channels results in depolarization, causing
voltage gated Ca2+ channels to open.
The rise in cytosolic Ca2+ causes exocytosis of the vesicles, which then secrete
insulin and C peptide into the blood.
All of the hormones or neurotransmitters named below attach to membrane
receptors (R). In contrast, the metabolic substrates, glucose and amino acids, enter
the β cell.
Pancreatic β Cell
Stimuli that inhibit insulin secretion Stimuli that promote insulin secretion
Somatostatin RSS Glucose
Increased intracellular Amino acids arginine
metabolism of glucose
RGIP
Intestinal hormones
Sympathetic ATP GIP
innervation (α) Rα GLP
norepinephrine
RGlcg Glucagon
Insulin and C peptide
Figure VII 6 5. Control of Insulin Secretion
Figure X 6 5. Control of Insulin Secretion
Incretin
Incretin
GIP =GaGsItPri:c gasitnrhicibitoryinhibitopreyptide peptide or glucose
or glucoseinsulininostruolipnioctropic peptidpeeptide
GLP = Glucagon like peptide
GLP: glucagon like peptide
303
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 303 15/10/22 2:21P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
ACTIONS OF GLUCAGON
Glucagon is a peptide hormone. It is secreted by the α cells of the pancreatic islets.
NOTE The primary target for glucagon action is the liver hepatocyte, where its action is
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
mediated by an increase in the concentration of cAMP. The cAMP activates
Skeletal muscle is not a target tissue for
protein kinase A, which, by catalyzing phosphorylation, alters the activity of
glucagon.
enzymes mediating the actions given below.
Microbiology
Actions of Glucagon on the Liver
There are several specific actions of glucagon on the liver:
• Increases liver glycogenolysis
– Glucagon activates glycogen phosphorylase, breaking down glycogen to
glucose 1 phosphate.
– Glucagon inactivates glycogen synthetase, preventing the glucose
1 phosphate from being recycled back into glycogen.
• Increases liver gluconeogenesis
– Glucagon inhibits phosphofructokinase 2 (PFK 2), thereby reducing 2,6
bisphosphate, which in turn inhibits PFK 1 (an important enzyme
driving glycolysis). Inhibition of PFK 1 aids gluconeogenesis.
– In addition, glucagon, along with cortisol, enhances phosphoenolpyru
vate carboxykinase, a key enzyme in the gluconeogenic pathway.
– Finally, glucagon stimulates glucose 6 phosphatase, thereby releasing
glucose into the blood (see Biochemistry Lecture Notes).
• Increases liver ketogenesis and decreases lipogenesis: Glucagon inhibits
the activity of acetyl CoA carboxylase, decreasing the formation of
malonyl CoA. When the concentration of malonyl CoA is low, ketogenesis
is favored over lipogenesis.
• Increases ureagenesis: It stimulates N acetylglutamate synthesis, which
stimulates the production of urea (see Biochemistry notes).
• Increases insulin secretion: The amino acid sequence of glucagon is
similar to that of the duodenal hormone, secretin. Like secretin (and most
other gut hormones), glucagon stimulates insulin secretion.
• Increases lipolysis in the liver: Glucagon activates hormone sensitive
lipase in the liver, but because the action is on the liver and not the
adipocyte, glucagon is not considered a major fat mobilizing hormone.
304
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 304 15/10/22 2:21P
CHAPTER 6 | ENDOCRINE PANCREAS
CONTROL OF GLUCAGON SECRETION
Major factors that control glucagon secretion are summarized in the figure
below. Stimuli that promote glucagon secretion are depicted on the right, while
those that inhibit secretion are depicted on the left.
Pancreatic α Cell
Stimuli that inhibit glucagon secretion Stimuli that promote glucagon secretion
Hyperglycemia Hypoglycemia
Decreased intracellular
Amino acids arginine
metabolism of glucose
Insulin Rlns
Somatostatin RSS
R designates a surface receptor for the
particular hormone or neurotransmitter.
Glucagon
Figure VII 6 6. Control of Glucagon Secretion
Figure X 6 6. Control of Glucagon Secretion
Low plasma glucose (hypoglycemia) is the most important physiologic promoter
for glucagon secretion, and elevated plasma glucose (hyperglycemia) the most
important inhibitor.
Amino acids, especially dibasic amino acids (arginine, lysine), also promote the
secretion of glucagon. Thus, glucagon is secreted in response to the ingestion of a
meal rich in proteins.
305
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 305 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Glucose Counterregulation
Glucose counterregulation is the concept that plasma glucose concentration is
regulated by insulin and hormones opposing or countering its actions. The figure
below shows glucose regulation in the postprandial and postabsorptive states.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Postprandial I/G ↑ Post absorptive I/G ↓
Glucose
Microbiology too low Cortisol
Very low
Liver Liver
Epi glucose
AA
Release Uptake Release Uptake
Skeletal Skeletal
Uptake Uptake
GI tract ↑ Blood Glucose muscle GI tract ↓ Blood Glucose muscle
GLUT 4 GLUT 4
Adipose Adipose
Pancreas: Secretes Pancreas: Secretes
Insulin Glucagon GH
Stimulate/increase
Inhibit/decrease
FiFgiugruere VIIX667.7.InsuIlninsulinActionsActiionnsLiver in Liver
Insulin : Glucagon Ratio
Insulin and glucagon move substrates in opposite directions. The direction of sub
strate fluxes is very sensitive to this ratio.
• Normal postabsorptive ratio: 2.0
• States requiring mobilization of substrates ratio: ≤0.5
• Carbohydrate meal, ratio ≥10
• Protein meal or fat meal produces little change in the ratio
DIABETES MELLITUS
In both types of diabetes mellitus (DM), there is hyperglycemia, polyuria,
increased thirst and fluid intake, hyperosmolar state, recurrent blurred vision,
mental confusion, lethargy, weakness, and abnormal peripheral sensation.
Coma—if it does occur—is due to the hyperosmotic environment, not the
acidosis.
306
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 306 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 6 | ENDOCRINE PANCREAS
Type 2 DM
Type 2 DM accounts for about 90% of all cases of diabetes. There is a strong genet
ic component.
• Body build is usually obese (particularly central or visceral).
• Usually middle aged or older but number of younger patients is increasing
• Characterized by variable degrees of insulin resistance, impaired insulin
secretion, and increased hepatic output of glucose. Insulin resistance
precedes secretory defects and in the early stages hyperinsulinemia is able
to overcome tissue resistance. Ultimately beta cell failure can occur.
• Insulin levels may be high, normal, or low.
• Resistance to insulin is not well understood. It is thought to be due to
postreceptor defects in signaling, which ultimately lead to a decrease in
the number of glucose transporters. Reducing plasma glucose and thus
plasma insulin can increase receptor sensitivity toward normal.
• Plasma glucose is a good screening for type 2. Elevated glucose is due to
elevated hepatic output.
• With a controlled diet and exercise, the symptoms of type 2 DM often
disappear without the necessity for pharmacologic therapy.
• Individuals tend to be ketosis resistant. The presence of some endogenous
insulin secretion appears to protect from development of a ketoacidosis. If
it does develop, it is usually the result of severe stress or infection
(increased counterregulatory hormones, suppressed insulin).
• In nonobese patients, a deficient insulin release by the pancreas is often
the problem, but varying degrees of insulin resistance can also occur.
Metabolic Syndrome (Syndrome X)
Metabolic syndrome is a group of metabolic derangements that includes athero
genic dyslipidemia (low HDL) and high triglycerides, elevated blood glucose,
hypertension, central obesity, prothrombotic state, and a proinflammatory state.
The clustering of these risk factors increases the probability of developing
cardiovascular disease and type 2 DM.
Type 1 DM
The genetic association in type 1 is less marked than in type 2. It affects genetically
predisposed individuals whose immune system destroys pancreatic beta
cells. Symptoms do not become evident until 80% of the beta cells are destroyed.
• Body build usually lean
• Usually early age of onset (not always)
• Caused by an absence of insulin production
• Increased glucagon secretion also generally occurs
• Three target tissues for insulin—liver, skeletal muscle, and adipose
tissue—fail to take up absorbed nutrients (glucose, amino acids, and fatty
acids), thus increasing their levels in the blood.
307
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 307 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Metabolic effects in insulin deficient individuals
CHO
• Increased blood glucose concentration
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences • Increased glycogen breakdown
• Decreased peripheral glucose use
Protein
Microbiology • Increased protein breakdown
• Increased catabolism of amino acids
• Increased gluconeogenesis
• Increased ureagenesis
• Decreased protein synthesis
Fat
• Increased triglyceride breakdown
• Increased level of circulating free fatty acids
• Increased ketosis, resulting in ketoacidosis (metabolic acidosis)
• Decreased fatty acid synthesis
• Decreased triglyceride synthesis
Renal System
The failure to reabsorb all the filtered glucose in the proximal tube also prevents
normal water and electrolyte reabsorption in this segment, resulting in an osmotic
diuresis (polyuria). This causes loss of glucose, water, and electrolytes from the
body. Thus, even though the electrolyte concentration of the urine is low, body
stores of electrolytes, particularly Na+ and K+, are lost.
Potassium Ion
• Hydrogen ions move intracellularly to be buffered, and potassium ions
leave the cell, reducing the intracellular concentration.
• There is a lack of the normal insulin effect of pumping potassium ion into
cells.
• Consequently, hyperkalemia is typical, but plasma K+ may be normal or
low because of renal loss. Regardless, the body stores of K+ are reduced
because of the renal loss.
• Insulin replacement can produce severe hypokalemia, and potassium
replacement is a normal part of therapy.
Sodium Ion
• Polyuria decreases total body sodium but dehydration may keep sodium
within or close to the normal range.
• Hyperosmolar state due to the hyperglycemia. Thus, 2 times the sodium
concentration is not a good index of osmolarity.
glucose mg/dL
Effective osmolarity = 2 (Na) mEq/L +
18
308
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 308 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 6 | ENDOCRINE PANCREAS
Hyperosmolar Coma
• Severe hyperglycemia shifts fluid from the intracellular to the extracellular
space.
• Polyuria decreases volume of the extracellular space and leads to a
decreased renal plasma flow and a reduced glucose excretion. Combined
with the rise in counterregulatory hormones, the plasma glucose rises
further.
• The severe loss of intracellular fluid from the brain causes the coma.
• Type 2 diabetics often present with the highest plasma glucose and greater
states of dehydration. Thus these patients have a higher incidence of coma.
Diabetic Ketoacidosis (DKA)
Without any insulin, excessive lipolysis provides fatty acids to the liver, where they
are preferentially converted to ketone bodies because of the unopposed action of
glucagon.
• Blood pH and bicarbonate decrease due to the metabolic acidosis.
• Increased alveolar ventilation is the respiratory compensation for the
metabolic acidosis. When the arterial pH decreases to about 7.20, ventila
tion becomes deep and rapid (Kussmaul breathing).
• An acidic urine results as the kidneys attempt to compensate for the
acidosis.
• The severe acidosis is in addition to the dehydration and net decrease in
total body sodium and potassium.
• Treatment is replacement of fluid and electrolytes and administration of
insulin
• DKA treatment is first, 2–3 liters of normal saline and IV insulin. Subcu
taneous insulin may not be fully absorbed because of decreased skin
perfusion. Hyponatremia is common because of hyperglycemia. For each
100 point increase in glucose above normal, there is a 1.6 decrease in
sodium.
100 mg ELEVATION glucose = 1.6 mEq DECREASE sodium
When hyponatremia is present with hyperglycemia, management is
correction of the elevated glucose level. When glucose returns to normal,
the sodium corrects.
Hypoglycemia
In the diabetic, overdosing with insulin causes hypoglycemia. Type 1 diabetics are
particularly prone to hypoglycemia; in these individuals the glucagon response to
hypoglycemia is reduced or absent.
Initial symptoms due to catecholamine release followed by the direct effects of
hypoglycemia include slowed mental processes and confusion.
309
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 309 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
PANCREATIC ENDOCRINE SECRETING TUMORS
Insulinomas
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Insulinomas are the most common islet cell tumor. They are found almost exclu
sively within the pancreas, and they hypersecrete insulin.
• Most common symptoms due to the hypoglycemia (confusion, disorienta
tion, headache)
Microbiology
• Association with MEN 1
• Insulin measured to determine insulin mediated versus noninsulin medi
ated hypoglycemia
• Insulin secreting tumor: insulin and C peptide both elevated
• Factitious hypoglycemia: C peptide below normal
• Treat with removal
Other Endocrine Secreting Tumors
• Gastrinomas
• Glucagonomas
• Somatostatinomas
• VIPomas
Management of all neuroendocrine tumors is localization with CT, then surgical
resection.
Glucagonoma
• Alpha cell oversecretion
• Hyperglycemia/diabetes
• Localize with CT scan
• Surgically remove
Summary
Table VII 6 1. Insulin Related Pathophysiologic States
Glucose Insulin C peptide Ketoacidosis
Type 2 diabetes ↑ ↑, ↔ ↑, ↔ −
Type 1 diabetes ↑ ↓ ↓ +
Insulinoma ↓ ↑ ↑ −
Factitious hypoglyce ↓ ↑ ↓ −
mia (self injection of
insulin)
310
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 310 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 6 | ENDOCRINE PANCREAS
OTHER HORMONES INVOLVED IN ENERGY
BALANCE AND APPETITE
Leptin
Leptin is produced in adipose tissue and is thought to be a “long term” regulator of
appetite and energy balance. Secretion is circadian, with the highest levels occur
ring at night and the nadir in the morning. Individual meals do not stimulate the
release of leptin.
• The leptin receptor is a member of the cytokine family of receptors, which
activate gene transcription factors.
• Leptin decreases hypothalamic neuropeptide Y (NPY), which is a potent
activator of feeding (orexigenic). By inhibiting NPY synthesis, leptin
promotes satiety (anorexigenic).
• Leptin increases energy expenditure, in part by increasing fatty acid
oxidation, and it decreases fat stores. Lack of and/or resistance to leptin
causes obesity.
Adiponectin BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
Adiponectin is produced in adipose tissue, and it increases insulin sensitivity and Administration of thiazolidinediones (TZDs)
tissue fat oxidation. to diabetics increases the circulating levels
• Dysregulation of adiponectin, along with production of cytokines by of adiponectin, which may be part of the
adipocytes, may play a role in obesity, insulin resistance, and cachexia. mechanism by which these drugs reduce
Plasma levels of adiponectin are low in type 2 diabetics, and infusion of plasma glucose.
this hormone decreases plasma glucose in experimental animal models of
DM.
• The mechanism of action and regulation of secretion are not well under
stood, but it does appear to inhibit liver output of glucose.
Ghrelin
Ghrelin is produced by cells of the stomach. Circulating levels of ghrelin are
reduced in response to a meal and highest in the fasting state.
• Ghrelin activates hypothalamic NPY neurons (see leptin discussion above)
and is thus a potent orexigenic hormone. It also stimulates the release of
growth hormone (GH), although its physiologic significance/role is not
well understood. Because of ghrelin’s effects on GH and appetite, however,
it may prove beneficial for restoring GH levels in the elderly and anorexic
conditions, such as cancer.
• Ghrelin levels are decreased in obese individuals and elevated by low
calorie diets, strenuous exercise, and patients with Prader Willi syndrome. BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY
• Ghrelin is a peptide hormone that works via Gq and Gs. Its mechanism of Prader Willi syndrome is a genetic
action and regulation of secretion are not well understood.
condition affecting many parts of the body.
In infancy, it is characterized by hypotonia,
feeding difficulties, poor growth, and delayed
development. In childhood, patients develop
an insatiable appetite, leading to chronic
hyperphagia and obesity.
311
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 311 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Recall Question
Which of the following lab values is most consistent with
sulfonylurea abuse?
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
A. Increased serum glucose, increased insulin, increased
C peptide
B. Increased serum glucose, decreased insulin, decreased
Microbiology
C peptide
C. Decreased serum glucose, increased serum insulin, decreased
serum Cpeptide
D. Decreased serum glucose, increased serum insulin, increased
serum Cpeptide
E. Increased serum glucose, increased serum insulin, decreased
serum Cpeptide
Answer: D
312
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 312 15/10/22 2:22P
Hormonal Control of
7#
Calcium and Phosphate
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Solve problems concerning overview of calcium and phosphate
❏ Solve problems concerning bone remodeling
❏ Solve problems concerning parathyroid hormone
❏ Solve problems concerning calcitonin
❏ Demonstrate understanding of role of vitamin D (calcitriol) in calcium
homeostasis
❏ Solve problems concerning disorders in calcium and phosphate
❏ Answer questions about metabolic bone disorders
CALCIUM AND PHOSPHATE
Dietary calcium is absorbed in the GI tract.
• The dietary intake of and the percentage of calcium absorbed is dimin
ished in the elderly.
• Ingested phosphate is also absorbed by the GI tract.
• Both calcium and phosphate absorption in the GI tract are stimulated by
the active form of vitamin D (calcitriol).
The approximate percentage of the body’s total calcium is given for each of the
compartments in the figure below. In addition, the fraction of calcium is indicated.
The calcium concentration in the interstitial fluid is 103 – 104 times higher than
the free cytosolic calcium concentration. The initiation of many cellular processes
(secretion, movement of intracellular organelles, cell division) is linked to a
sudden brief increase in intracellular (cytosolic) calcium.
313
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 313 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Bone
Interstitial Fluid Plasma
99% of total calcium
• 0.1% of total calcium • <0.5% of total calcium
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Mostly as complex • Mostly Ca2+ • Half as Ca2+
calcium phosphate salts
• 1.5 mM • 40% protein bound calcium
(hydroxyapatites)
• 10% complexed to anions,
Microbiology e.g., phosphate, citrate
Intracellular Fluid
• 1% of total calcium
• Ca2+ and protein
bound calcium
Figure VII7 1. Calcium Distribution in the Body
Figure X 7 1. Calcium Distribution in the Body
Plasma Calcium
Plasma calcium represents 50% ionized free, 40% attached to protein, and 10%
associated with anions such as phosphate and citrate. The free calcium is the
physiologically active and precisely regulated form.
• Alkalosis (hyperventilation) decreases and acidosis increases free plasma
calcium by varying the amount bound to protein.
• Alkalosis lowers free calcium by increasing protein binding, while acidosis
raises free calcium by decreasing protein binding.
Protein bound Ca2+
plus phosphate and Free
citrate bound Ca2+ Ca2+
Figure X 7 2. Relationship of Bound and Free Calcium
Figure VII 7 2. Relationship of Bound and Free Calcium
Relationship Between Calcium and Phosphate
Bone is a complex precipitate of calcium and phosphate to which hydroxide and
bicarbonate ions are added to make up the mature hydroxyapatite crystals that are
laid down in a protein (osteoid) matrix.
Whether calcium and phosphate are laid down in bone (precipitate from solution)
or are resorbed from bone (go into solution) depends on the product of their
concentrations rather than on their individual concentrations.
314
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 314 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 7 | HORMONAL CONTROL OF CALCIUM AND PHOSPHATE
When the product exceeds a certain number (solubility product or ion product),
bone is laid down:
[Ca2+] × [PO–4] > solubility product = bone deposition
• Under normal conditions, the ECF product of calcium times phosphate is
close to the solubility product.
• Thus, an increase in the interstitial fluid concentration of Ca2+ or phos
phate increases bone mineralization.
• For example, an increase in plasma phosphate raises the product of their
concentrations, promotes precipitation, and lowers free calcium in the
interstitial fluid.
• A malignant increase in the concentration of calcium or phosphate due to
chronic renal disease or rhabdomyolysis can cause the precipitation of
calcium phosphate within tissues.
When the product is below the solubility product, bone is resorbed:
[Ca2+] × [PO–4] < solubility product = bone resorption
• Thus, a decrease in the interstitial concentration of Ca2+ or phosphate
promotes the resorption of these salts from bone (demineralization).
• For example, a decrease in plasma phosphate alone promotes bone
demineralization. Increasing the renal excretion of phosphate promotes
bone demineralization and a rise in interstitial free calcium.
It is the free Ca2+—not the phosphate—that is regulated so precisely. Hormonal
control of free Ca2+ levels is via a dual hormonal system: parathyroid hormone
(PTH) and vitamin D.
BONE REMODELING NOTE
Bone undergoes continual remodeling throughout life, although the turnover is As many as 300,000 bone remodeling sites
faster in younger individuals. Bone remodeling involves the interplay between are active in a normal person.
bone building cells (osteoblasts) and cells that break down bone (osteoclasts).
• Osteoblasts cause bone deposition; they secrete 2 proteins:
– RANK L (Receptor Activator of Nuclear KappaB Ligand) binds to the
RANK receptor, which is expressed on precursor cells resulting in their
differentiation into active osteoclasts. Active osteoclasts also express the
RANK receptor, which, when stimulated, activates osteoclastic activity.
– OPG (osteoprotegerin) binds RANK L, thereby preventing it from
binding onto precursor or osteoclast cells. This reduces differentiation
and overall osteoclastic activity. Thus, OPG acts as a “decoy” for
RANK L.
315
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 315 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
• Bone remodeling is influenced by PTH and the active form of vitamin D.
Estrogen is well known for conserving bone integrity and it does so by at
least 2 mechanisms:
– Induces the synthesis of OPG.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
– Reduces the secretion of cytokines by T lymphocytes; these cytokines
stimulate differentiation of precursor cells into active osteoclasts and
they stimulate activity of mature osteocytes
Microbiology – By inhibiting cytokines and increasing OPG, estrogen reduces the
activity of osteoclasts.
• Glucocorticoids increase bone breakdown by inducing the synthesis and
release of RANK L and by inhibiting the synthesis of OPG.
T lymphocytes
Osteoclast precursor
TN
6;
RANK IL (–)
1;
Y IL
Y
PTH
RANK L Differentiates
(+)
OPG Y into Estrogen
(+)
Osteoblast
Estrogen
Acidic environment that breaks Osteoclast
down bone: releases Ca2+ and Pi
Bone
RANK = receptor activator of nuclear factor kappaB
RANK L = receptor activator of nuclear factor kappaB ligand
OPG = osteoprotegerin (endogenous blocker of RANK L)
Pi = phosphate
Figure X 7 3F.igurReelatiVonIsIhip7 3. Relationbsheitpween betweenOsteoOblsatsetosblasts aanndd OstOeosctelaosctlsasts
Weight Bearing Stress
Weight bearing mechanical stress increases the mineralization of bone. The absence
of weight bearing stress (being sedentary, bedridden, or weightless) promotes the
demineralization of bone. Under these conditions, the following occurs:
• Plasma Ca2+ tends to be in the upper region of normal.
• Plasma PTH decreases.
• Urinary calcium increases.
316
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 316 15/10/22 2:22PM
CHAPTER 7 | HORMONAL CONTROL OF CALCIUM AND PHOSPHATE
Indices
Indices can be utilized to detect excess bone demineralization and remodeling:
• Increased serum osteocalcin and alkaline phosphatase are associated with
osteoblastic activity.
• Increased urinary excretion of hydroxyproline is a breakdown product of
collagen
PARATHYROID HORMONE (PTH)
Actions of PTH
A decrease in the free calcium is the signal to increase PTH secretion and the func
tion of PTH is to raise free calcium, which it does by several mechanisms.
• Increases Ca2+ reabsorption in distal tubule of the kidney (see chapter 4,
Part VI)
• Inhibits phosphate (Pi) reabsorption in proximal tubule of the kidney
• Stimulates the 1 alpha hydroxylase enzyme in kidney, converting inactive
vitamin D to its active form
• Causes bone resorption, releasing Ca2+ and Pi into the blood
Bone resorption
The mechanisms of PTH induced bone resorption are complex and not fully
understood. However, the following generalizations do apply.
• Osteoblasts express receptors for PTH. Binding of PTH stimulates the
osteoblast to release RANK L. This in turn, increases osteoclastic activity
resulting in bone resorption and the release of calcium and phosphate into
the blood.
• Although counterintuitive, intermittent spikes in PTH (e.g., intravenous or
subcutaneous injection) stimulate osteoblastic activity resulting in bone
deposition. Thus, PTH can be useful in treating osteoporosis in the
clinical setting.
Parathyroid Hormone Related Peptide
Parathyroid hormone related peptide (PTHrP) is a paracrine factor secreted by
many tissues; e.g., lung, mammary tissue, placenta. It may have a role in fetal devel
opment. In postnatal life, its role is unclear.
• The majority of humoral hypercalcemias of malignancy are due to
overexpression of PTHrP.
• PTHrP has a strong structural homology to PTH and binds with equal
affinity to the PTH receptor.
317
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 317 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Regulation of PTH Secretion
PTH is a peptide hormone released from the parathyroid glands in response to
lowered plasma free Ca2+. Free Ca2+ in the plasma is the primary regulator of PTH.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences • The negative feedback relationship between plasma calcium and PTH
secretion is highly sigmoidal, with the steep portion of the curve repre
senting the normal range of plasma free calcium.
• To sense the free calcium, the parathyroid cell depends upon high levels of
Microbiology expression of the calcium sensing receptor (CaSR).
• In most cells, exocytosis depends on a rise in intracellular free calcium. In
the parathyroid gland, a fall in intracellular free calcium causes release.
• Depletion of magnesium stores can create a reversible hypoparathyroidism.
Normal range = region
Normal range =region
between dashed lines PTH between dashed lines
Ionized Calcium
Figure FigXure7 4V.IIR7ela4ti.onRsheilpationship betwbeeetwneen PPllaassmmaa CalCcaiulcmium and aPnTdH PTH
CALCITONIN
Calcitonin is a peptide hormone secreted by the parafollicular cells (C cells) of the
thyroid gland. It is released in response to elevated free calcium.
• Calcitonin lowers plasma calcium by decreasing the activity of osteoclasts,
thus decreasing bone resorption. It is useful in the treatment of Paget
disease, severe hypercalcemia, and osteoporosis.
• Calcitonin is not a major controller of Ca2+ in humans. Removing the
thyroid (with the C cells) or excess of calcitonin via a C cell tumor (medul
lary carcinoma of the thyroid) has little impact on plasma calcium.
• No deficiency or excess disease has been described.
ROLE OF VITAMIN D (CALCITRIOL) IN CALCIUM
HOMEOSTASIS
Sources and Synthesis
Vitamin D2 (ergocalciferol) is a vitamin but can functionally be considered a
prohormone. It is a normal dietary component. A slightly different form, vitamin
D3 (cholecalciferol), is synthesized in the skin. The synthesis of active 1,25 di OH
vitamin D (calcitriol) is outlined below.
318
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 318 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 7 | HORMONAL CONTROL OF CALCIUM AND PHOSPHATE
Dietary intake 7 Dehydrocholesterol
of vitamin D3 and D2 (synthesized in the skin)
Catalyzed by
ultraviolet light
Inactive vitamin D
25 Hydroxylase in liver
25 OH vitamin D
main circulating form but very
low activity [1000]
1a hydroxylase in renal
proximal tubule—its activity is
increased by low phosphate
and by PTH, and is decreased
by 1,25 di OH D3.
24,25 di OH vitamin D 1,25 di OH vitamin D (calcitriol)
[100] ACTIVE form of Vitamin D
(biologically inactive)
Figure VII7 5. Vitamin D Metabolism
Figure X 7 5. Vitamin D Metabolism
The synthesis of calcitriol occurs sequentially in the skin → liver →kidney. The
relative numbers of molecules of each of the hydroxylated forms of D present in
the blood of a normal person are given in brackets. After its conversion to the 25
OH form in the liver, it can be stored in fat tissue. The serum levels of 25 OH
vitamin D represent the best measure of the body stores of vitamin D when a
deficiency is suspected. Most of the 25 OH form, which is the immediate precursor
of 1,25 di OH D, is converted to the inactive metabolite, 24,25 di OH D. Ultravio
let (UV) light also evokes skin tanning, decreasing the penetration of UV light,
and thus decreases the subsequent formation of D3. This mechanism may prevent
overproduction of D3 in individuals exposed to large amounts of sunlight.
Actions of Calcitriol
Under normal conditions, vitamin D acts to raise plasma Ca2+ and phosphate.
Thus, vitamin D promotes bone deposition. This is accomplished by the following:
• Calcitriol increases the absorption of Ca2+ and phosphate in intestinal
mucosa by increasing the production of the Ca2+ binding protein calbin
din. The details of this process are poorly understood.
• The resulting high concentrations of Ca2+ and phosphate in the extracel
lular fluid exceed the solubility product, and precipitation of bone salts
into bone matrix occurs.
• Calcitriol enhances PTH’s action at the renal distal tubule.
319
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 319 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
At abnormally high activity levels calcitriol increases bone resorption and release
of Ca2+ and phosphate from bone. Receptors for calcitriol are on the nuclear
membranes of osteoblasts. Through communication from osteoblasts, activated
osteoclasts carry out the bone resorption. Calcitriol requires the concurrent
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences presence of PTH for its bone resorbing action.
The figure below provides an overview of regulation of calcium and phosphate by
PTH and vitamin D.
Microbiology
Summary
Estrogen Plasma
Estrogen Plasma PlasCmaa2+ Ca2+ Plasma
phosphate
phosphate
H+ H+
Renal Ca2+Renal Ca2+
PTH
PTH
reabsorptionreabsorption Renal pRheonsaplhate phosphate
Stimulates Stimulates reabsorption reabsorption
Inhibits Inhibits
Ca2+ mobilization
Ca2+ mobilization from bone 1 hydroxylas 1 e hydroxylase 25 hydroxy 2 la 5 se hydroxylase
from bone in kidney in liver
in kidney in liver
excessexcess
25 (OH) D3
Ca2+ absorptionCa2a+bsorption 25 (OH) D3
from GI
from GI
Cortisol
Cortisol
7 dehydro 7 dehydro
1,25 (OH1),225 -D3(OH)2 -D3 cholesterol
cholesterol
GI phosphaGteI phosphate
absorption
absorption
FFiigguurree VIIX7 67. R6e.gulRateigounlationof Calciumof aCnadlciuPmhosphateand Phosphate
Figure X 7 6. Regulation of Calcium and Phosphate
DISORDERS IN CALCIUM AND PHOSPHATE
Hypercalcemia
Hypercalcemia of primary hyperparathyroidism
• Initiating factor is primary hypersecretion of PTH
• Consequences include increased plasma calcium, decreased plasma
phosphate, polyuria, hypercalciuria, and decreased bone mass
• 80% due to a single parathyroid adenoma
• High calcium can lead to nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. This is why there
can be massive volume deficit in hypercalcemia.
• High calcium makes it harder to depolarize neural tissue. This is why
hypercalcemia causes lethargy, confusion, and constipation.
• 15% due to primary hyperplasia as in MEN 1 or MEN 2A
• Parathyroid carcinoma rare
320
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 320 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 7 | HORMONAL CONTROL OF CALCIUM AND PHOSPHATE
• Ectopic hormonal hypercalcemia usually PTHrP
• Most patients asymptomatic
• Symptoms include lethargy, fatigue, depression, neuromuscular weakness,
and difficulty in concentrating
• Increased plasma alkaline phosphatase, osteocalcin and increased excre
tion of cAMP (second messenger for PTH in the kidney), and hydroxypro
line
• Severe dehydration
• Bone manifestation is osteitis fibrosa cystica in which there are increased
osteoclasts in scalloped areas of the surface bone and replacement of
marrow elements with fibrous tissue. Increased alkaline phosphatase is
due to high bone turnover.
• Hypercalcemia decreases QT interval and in some cases causes cardiac
arrhythmias.
Related causes of hypercalcemia
• Lithium shifts the sigmoid Ca/PTH curve to the right. Higher calcium lev
els are thus needed to suppress PTH. Similarly, the CaSR is mutated in
patients with familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (FHH; see Renal
Physiology section, chapter 4), resulting in more PTH for any given
calcium concentration in the plasma.
• Sarcoidosis and other granulomatous disorders (10%) due to increased
activity of 1 alpha hydroxylase activity in granulomas
• Thyrotoxicosis, milk alkali syndrome
• Thiazide diuretics increase renal calcium reabsorption.
Differential diagnosis and treatment
• Elevated plasma calcium and PTH normal or elevated; conclusion is
primary hyperparathyroidism (lithium and FHH are exceptions)
• Elevated plasma calcium and decreased PTH; conclusion is something other
than primary hyperparathyroidism
• Treatment is usually surgery, i.e., removing the adenoma or with hyperpla
sia removing most of the parathyroid tissue; also give high volume fluid
replacement
• Bisphosphonates need 2–3 days to be fully effective
• Calcitonin rapidly inhibits osteoclastic activity
Hypocalcemia
Hypocalcemia of primary hypoparathyroidism
• Can be hereditary or autoimmune
• Caused by thyroid surgery or surgery to correct hyperparathyroidism
• The initiating factor is inadequate secretion of PTH by the parathyroid
glands.
321
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 321 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
• The decrease in plasma calcium is accompanied by an increased plasma
phosphate. Even though less phosphate is resorbed from bone, plasma
phosphate increases because the normal action of PTH is to inhibit
phosphate reabsorption and increase excretion by the kidney. Therefore,
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences without PTH, more of the filtered load is reabsorbed.
• Symptoms focus on the hypocalcemic induced increased excitability of
motor neurons creating muscular spasms and tetany
• Chvostek’s sign is induced by tapping the facial nerve just anterior to the
Microbiology
ear lobe.
• Trousseau’s sign is elicited by inflating a pressure cuff on the upper arm. A
positive response is carpal spasm.
• Hypomagnesemia prevents PTH secretion and induces hypocalcemia.
This condition responds immediately to an infusion of magnesium.
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
• This is a rare familial disorder characterized by target tissue resistance to
PTH.
• Exhibits same signs and symptoms as primary hypoparathyroidism except
PTH elevated
• It is usually accompanied by developmental defects: intellectual disability,
short and stocky stature, one or more metacarpal or metatarsal bones
missing (short 4th or 5th finger).
Additional causes of hypocalcemia
• Acute hypocalcemia can occur even with intact homeostatic mechanisms.
Included would be alkalosis via hyperventilation, transfusions of citrated
blood, rhabdomyolysis or tumor lysis, and the subsequent hyperphospha
temia
• Hyperphosphatemia of chronic renal failure
• Failures with vitamin D system
• Congenital absence of parathyroids rare (DiGeorge’s syndrome)
• Damaged muscle binds calcium. Rhabdomyolysis binds free calcium.
Predictive indices for a primary disorder
When plasma calcium and phosphate levels are changing in opposite directions,
the cause is usually a primary disorder. An exception is chronic renal failure,
which is not a primary disorder but is usually associated with hypocalcemia and
hyperphosphatemia (hypocalcemic induced secondary hyperparathyroidism).
Renal Failure and Secondary Hyperparathyroidism
• Most common cause of secondary hyperparathyroidism
• Loss of nephrons prevents kidneys from excreting phosphate (Pi)
• Elevated Pi lowers free Ca2+, which in turn increases PTH
322
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 322 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 7 | HORMONAL CONTROL OF CALCIUM AND PHOSPHATE
Vitamin D Deficiency and Secondary Hyperparathyroidism
• Causes include a diet deficient in vitamin D, inadequate sunlight expo
sure, malabsorption of vitamin D, enzyme deficiencies in the pathway to
activation of vitamin D
• In all cases there is a decrease in plasma calcium, which elicits an increase
in PTH secretion and a secondary hyperparathyroidism.
• A similar consequence is the increased demand for calcium as in preg
nancy.
• Characterized by increased PTH, decreased plasma calcium, and
decreased plasma phosphate. Even though the elevated PTH increases
phosphate resorption from bone, PTH also inhibits phosphate reabsorp
tion by the kidney, thereby promoting phosphate excretion and a drop in
plasma phosphate.
• Bone mass is lost to maintain plasma calcium.
• Diagnostic test is a low plasma 25(OH) vitamin D.
Excess Vitamin D and Secondary Hypoparathyroidism
• An excessive intake of vitamin D raises plasma calcium, which elicits a
decrease in PTH
• Characterized by decreased PTH, increased plasma calcium, and increased
plasma phosphate but normal or decreased phosphate excretion. Because
PTH increases the excretion of phosphate by inhibiting reabsorption in
the proximal tubule, decreased PTH causes increased reabsorption of
phosphate and elevated plasma levels.
• Excessive vitamin D promotes bone resorption and bone mass decreases.
Predictive indices for a secondary disorder
When the plasma calcium and phosphate are changing in the same direction, the
origin is usually a secondary disorder.
• Secondary hyperparathyroidism: both decrease
• Secondary hypoparathyroidism: both increase
Note also that with either a deficiency or an excess of vitamin D, there is a decrease
in bone mass but mechanism differs (high PTH in deficiency; direct effect of vita
min D with excess).
323
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 323 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Recall Question
Estrogen conserves bone integrity by which of the following
mechanisms?
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
A. Induces the synthesis of RANK Lreceptors
B. Reduces the activity of osteoblasts
Microbiology C. Reduces the secretion of cytokines by Tlymphocytes
D. Increases differentiation and overall osteoclastic activity
E. Increases bone breakdown
Answer: C
METABOLIC BONE DISORDERS
Osteoporosis
Osteoporosis is a loss of bone mass (both mineralization and matrix) with fractures,
caused by normal age related changes in bone remodeling and other factors that
exaggerate this process.
• If bone mineral density is 2.5 standard deviations below the average, that
equals osteoporosis.
• If bone mineral density is 1–2.5 standard deviations below the average,
that equals osteopenia.
• Bone mass reaches a peak subsequent to puberty. Heredity accounts for
most of the variation but physical activity, nutrition, and reproductive
hormones play a significant role, especially estrogens (even in men).
• Secondary osteoporosis can occur in thyrotoxicosis and particularly with
elevations in glucocorticoids.
• Calcitonin inhibits bone resorption.
A mainstay of treatment is bisphosphonates, which are rapidly incorporated into
bone and reduce the activity of osteoclasts. Additionally:
• Denosumab: inhibitor of RANKL (RANKL is a TNF family of cytokines
that activates osteoclasts, thus, denosumab inhibits osteoclasts.)
• Teriparatide: synthetic PTH (When used intermittently, teriparatide has a
stimulatory effect on osteoblastic bone formation.)
• Calcitonin
• Raloxifene: selective estrogen receptor modifier
324
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 324 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 7 | HORMONAL CONTROL OF CALCIUM AND PHOSPHATE
Rickets and Osteomalacia
Rickets is seen before plate closure, while osteomalacia is seen after plate closure.
The origin is the abnormal mineralization of bone and cartilage.
• Most common cause in adults is a malabsorption disorder, e.g., celiac
disease; other causes include vitamin D deficiency and enzyme
deficiencies when substrate availability is normal (rare)
• In rickets, symptoms include expansion of the epiphyseal plates: bowing of
the legs and protuberant abdomen are most striking abnormalities
• In osteomalacia, symptoms are more subtle
325
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 325 15/10/22 2:22P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 326 15/10/22 2:22P
8#
Thyroid Hormones
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Solve problems concerning overview of the thyroid gland
❏ Use knowledge of biosynthesis and transport of thyroid hormones
❏ Interpret scenarios on physiologic actions of thyroid hormones
❏ Answer questions about control of thyroid hormone secretion
❏ Answer questions about pathologic changes in thyroid hormone
secretion
THE THYROID GLAND
In mammals, thyroid hormones are essential for normal growth and maturation.
Therefore, thyroid hormones are major anabolic hormones.
Dietary intake of about 500 μg per day is typical, mainly in the form of iodide (I–)
or iodine (I). To maintain normal thyroid hormone secretion, 150 mg is the minimal
intake necessary. I–is the form absorbed from the small intestine.
• The functional unit of the thyroid gland is the follicle.
• The lumen is filled with thyroglobulin, which contains large numbers of
thyroid hormone molecules.
• Surrounding the lumen are the follicle cells, which function to both
synthesize and release thyroid hormones.
327
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 327 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Thyroid Gland
Iodide trap
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Extracellular 120 μg
Fluid
(ECF) Iodide leak
60 μg
Microbiology
Thyroid
Follicle
Follicle
lumen
thyroglobulin
Thyroid follicle
storage
cells synthesize
and secrete T4
and T3
Colloidal storage of
Secrete
iodine as iodinated
tyrosines of
60 μg of new thyroglobulin
8000 μg total,
hormone/day
of which 600 μg
is T4 and T3
Figure VII 8 1. The Thyroid Follicle
Figure X 8 1. The Thyroid Follicle
328
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 328 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 8 | THYROID HORMONES
BIOSYNTHESIS AND TRANSPORT OF THYROID HORMONE
Synthesis of Thyroid Hormone
Follicle Lumen
Iodination
Coupling
OH OH
I I MIT T3 T4 DIT
Thyroglobulin
I–Oxidation
I–I° MIT DIT
Peroxidase
Peroxidase
(TPO)
Exocytosis
Thyroglobulin (Tg) synthesis
I–(NIS)
ECF
I–2Na+
Figure FigurXe 8VI2I. 8S2te.psSteps ininTThyhryoriodid SynStyhnesthisesis
Iodide transport
Iodine uptake is via a sodium/potassium pump powered sodium/iodide symporter
on the basal membrane (NIS). This pump can raise the concentration of Ī within
the cell to as much as 250× that of plasma. The pump can be blocked by anions
like perchlorate and thiocyanate, which compete with I.
Along the apical membrane, the I ̄ is transported into the lumen by an anion
exchanger called pendrin.
The 24 hour iodine uptake by the thyroid is directly proportional to thyroid
function.
329
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 329 15/10/22 2:22PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
% Uptake of
123Iodine
Microbiology Hyperthyroid
Normal
Hypothyroid
0 24 hr
Time
Figure X 8 3. Relationship of Thyroid Function and Iodine Uptake
Figure VII8 3. Relationship of Thyroid Function and Iodine Uptake
Thyroglobulin synthesis
A high molecular weight protein (>300,000 daltons) is synthesized in ribosomes,
glycosylated in the endoplasmic reticulum, and packaged into vesicles in the Golgi
apparatus. The thyroglobin then enters the lumen via exocytosis.
Oxidation of I–to I°
The enzyme thyroperoxidase (TPO), which is located at the apical border of the
follicle cell, catalyzes oxidation. Peroxidase also catalyzes iodination and coupling.
Iodination
As thyroglobulin is extruded into the follicular lumen, aportion (<20%) of its
tyrosine residues are iodinated. The catalyst for this reaction is peroxidase. The
initial products of iodination are mono and diiodotyrosine (MIT and DIT),
respectively, with the latter form predominating, except when iodine is scarce.
Coupling
Peroxidase also promotes the coupling of iodinated tyrosine in the thyroglobulin
molecule. When two DITs couple, tetraiodothyronine (T4) is formed. When one
DIT and one MIT combine, triiodothyronine (T3) is formed. When iodine is
abundant, mainly T4 is formed. But when iodine becomes scarce, the production
of T3 increases.
Storage of thyroid hormones
Enough hormone is stored as iodinated thyroglobulin in the follicular colloid to
last the body for 2–3 months.
330
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 330 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 8 | THYROID HORMONES
Structure of Thyroid Hormones NOTE
The chemical structures of T4, T3, and reverse T3 (rT3) are shown below. For the exam, do not memorize structure;
instead, note the number and location of
iodines attached to the tyrosine residues.
I I
3' 3
HO O CH2—CH—COOH Thyroxine (T4) 3,5,3',5', tetra iodothyronine
5' 5
I I NH2
I I
3,5,3' tri iodothyronine (T3)
HO O CH2—CH—COOH • More active form of hormone
—
• No 5' I
I NH2
I I
3,3',5' tri iodothyronine (reverse T3)
HO O CH2—CH—COOH • No activity
—
• No 5 I
I NH2
Figure VII 8 4. Active and Inactive Forms of Thyroid Hormones
Figure X 8 4. Active and Inactive Forms of Thyroid Hormones
331
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 331 15/10/22 2:22PM
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Secretion of Thyroid Hormone
The figure below illustrates the main steps in thyroglobulin degradation and the
release of thyroid hormones.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
MIT T3 T4 DIT Colloid
Thyroglobulin
Microbiology
Pinocytosis
MIT T3 T4 DIT
Recycled
tyrosine I–and TG
Fusion Lysosome
Deiodination
MIT Proteolysis of
DIT thyroglobulin
Secretion Plasma
T4 T3
Figure FigurXe 8VI5I.8Se5c.reStieocnretion ooff TThhyyroroidid HormHoonremone
Pinocytosis: Pieces of the follicular colloid are taken back into the follicle by
endocytosis.
Fusion: The endocytosed material fuses with lysosomes, which transport it toward
the basal surface of the cell.
Proteolysis of thyroglobulin: Within the lysosomes, the thyroglobulin is broken
into free amino acids, some of which are T4, T3, DIT, and MIT.
Secretion: T4 and T3 are secreted into the blood, with the T4:T3 ratio being as
high as 20:1. The thyroid has the same 5’ mono deiodinase found in many
peripheral tissues and in an iodine deficient state more of the hormone can be
released as T3.
Along with thyroid hormones a small amount of thyroglobulin is also released into
the circulation. Its release is increased in a number of states including thyroiditis,
nodular goiter, and by cancerous thyroid tissue. After the surgical removal of
cancerous thyroid tissue, any residual thyroglobulin in the circulation indicates
cancerous cells are still present.
Deiodination: A microsomal deiodinase removes the iodine from iodinated
tyrosines (DIT and MIT) but not from the iodinated thyronines (T3 and T4). The
iodine is then available for resynthesis of hormone. (Individuals with a deficiency
of this enzyme are more likely to develop symptoms of iodine deficiency.)
332
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 332 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 8 | THYROID HORMONES
Transport of Thyroid Hormones in Blood
There is an equilibrium between bound and free circulating thyroid hormone in
the bloodstream.
> 99% < 1%
T4
TBG,
Free thyroid hormones
etc. TBG=thyroid TbBinGding= tghlyorbouidlin binding globulin
T3
Figure X 8 6. Plasma Transport of Thyroid Hormone
Figure VII8 6. Plasma Transport of Thyroid Hormone
About 70% of the circulating thyroid is bound to thyroid binding globulin (TBG).
The remainder of the bound protein is attached to thyroxine binding prealbumin
(transthyretin) and albumin. Large variations in TBG do not normally affect the
free form. A rare congenital deficiency or excess of TBG drastically alters the
bound fraction but because the free fraction is normal, the individuals are all
euthyroid.
Also, T4 has the higher affinity for binding proteins; therefore, it binds more
tightly to protein than does T3, and consequently has a greater half life than T3.
Most circulating thyroid hormone is T4. Normally, there is 50× more T4 than T3.
• T4 half life = 6 days
• T3 half life = 1 day
The amount of circulating thyroid hormone is about 3× the amount normally
secreted by the thyroid gland each day. Thus, circulating protein bound thyroid
hormones act as a significant reserve.
Activation and Degradation of Thyroid Hormones
T3 and T4 bind to the same nuclear receptor, but T3 binds with 10x more affinity
than T4. Because it has greater affinity for the receptor, T3 is the more active form
of thyroid hormone.
• Many target tissues can regulate the conversion of T4 to either T3 or rT3,
thereby locally controlling hormone activity.
• Most of the circulating T3 is derived from the peripheral conversion of
T4 into T3 and its release again into the circulation (e.g., liver, kidney, and
skeletal muscle).
333
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 333 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Thyroxine (T4)
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences Activation via 5' Degradation via 5
monodeiodinase monodeiodinase
Microbiology More Active Hormone Biologically Inactive
T3 Reverse T3
T4
I I
3' 3
O
5' 5
I I
Figure XFi8gure7. VPeIIriph8er7al. PeripheralConveCrsoinovnersion ofofThyTrhoyidroidHormonHeormone
Certain clinical states are associated with a reduction in the conversion of T4 into
T3, often with an enhanced conversion of T4 into rT3 (low T3 syndrome). Such
states would include fasting, medical and surgical stresses, catabolic diseases, and
even excess secretion of cortisol could be included.
The result is a reduction in metabolic rate and a conservation of energy resources.
In the early stages, the circulating T4 is normal but in many cases as the metabolic
problem or stress becomes more severe, T4 can fall as well.
PHYSIOLOGIC ACTIONS OF THYROID HORMONES
In many tissues, thyroid hormones are not the prime indicators or the major
inhibitors of specific cellular processes. Rather, a multitude of processes function
properly only when optimal amounts of thyroid hormones are present. This
underscores the permissive nature of thyroid hormones.
Metabolic Rate
Thyroid hormones increase metabolic rate, as evidenced by increased O2 consump
tion and heat production. Thyroid hormones increase the activity of the mem
brane bound Na/K–ATPase in many tissues, and it can be argued that it is the
increased pumping of Na+ that accounts for most of the increase in metabolic rate.
• The increase in metabolic rate produced by a single dose of T4 occurs only
after a latency of several hours but may last 6 days or more.
• Thyroid hormones are absolutely necessary for normal brain maturation
and essential for normal menstrual cycles. Hypothyroidism leads to
menstrual irregularities (menorrhagia) and infertility (anovulatory
cycles).
334
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 334 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 8 | THYROID HORMONES
Growth and Maturation (T4 and T3 Anabolic Hormones)
Fetal growth rates appear normal in the absence of thyroid hormone production
(i.e., if the fetus is hypothyroid). However, without adequate thyroid hormones
during the perinatal period, abnormalities rapidly develop in nervous system
maturation.
• Synapses develop abnormally and there is decreased dendritic branching
and myelination. These abnormalities lead to intellectual disability.
• These neural changes are irreversible and lead to cretinism unless replace
ment therapy is started soon after birth.
Lipid Metabolism
• Thyroid hormone accelerates cholesterol clearance from the plasma.
• Thyroid hormones are required for conversion of carotene to vitamin A,
and, as a consequence, hypothyroid individuals can suffer from night
blindness and yellowing of the skin.
CHO Metabolism
• Thyroid hormone increases the rate of glucose absorption from the small
intestine.
Cardiovascular Effects
• Thyroid hormones have positive inotropic and chronotropic effects on the
heart.
• The increased contractility is partly direct and partly indirect: they
increase the number and affinity of β adrenergic receptors in the heart,
thereby increasing the sensitivity to catecholamines.
• Acting on the SA node, they directly increase heart rate.
• Cardiac output is increased, and both heart rate and stroke volume are
elevated.
• Systolic pressure increases are due to increased stroke volume, and
diastolic pressure decreases are due to decreased peripheral resistance.
• Thyroid hormones in the normal range are required for optimum cardiac
performance.
Additional Effects
Thyroid hormones maintain the ventilatory response to hypoxia, increase erythro
poietin, and increase gut motility and bone turnover.
Hypothyroidism is associated with an increased prolactin. TRH in excess amounts
will stimulate prolactin.
335
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 335 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
CONTROL OF THYROID HORMONE SECRETION
Feedback Relationships
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
The overall control of thyroid function can be seen in the figure below.
Hypothalamic nuclei secrete
Microbiology thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH)
into portal vessels stimulating ...
...thyrotrophs
of anterior
pituitary
to secrete...
Within the thyrotroph, thyroid
hormones decrease the sensitivity
TSH of the thyrotroph to TRH, thereby
decreasing TSH secretion.
T4 (50)
Thyroid gland
T3 (1)
Figure VIIFig8ur8e. HypotXhala8mic–8P.ituHitayrpyothalamic–PCitounittraoryl of Thyroid HormCoonnetrol Secretion
of Thyroid Hormone Secretion
• TRH provides a constant and necessary stimulus for TSH secretion. In the
absence of TRH, the secretion of TSH (and T4) decreases to very low
levels. The target tissue for TSH is the thyroid, where it increases the
secretion of thyroid hormone, T4 being the predominant form.
• Negative feedback of thyroid hormones is exerted mainly at the level of the
anterior pituitary gland.
• Because the main circulating form is T4, it is T4 that is responsible for
most of the negative feedback.
• However, within the thyrotrophs the T4 is converted to T3 before it acts to
reduce the sensitivity of the thyrotroph to TRH.
• As long as circulating free T4 remains normal, changes in circulating
T3 have minimal effects on TSH secretion. However, TSH secretion
increases if there is a significant drop in circulating free T4, even in the
presence of an increase in circulating T3.
336
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 336 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 8 | THYROID HORMONES
Overall Effects of Thyrotropin (TSH) on the Thyroid
Rapidly induced TSH effects
TSH tends to rapidly increase (within minutes or an hour) all steps in the synthesis
and degradation of thyroid hormones, including:
• Iodide trapping
• Thyroglobulin synthesis and exocytosis into the follicular lumen
• Pinocytotic reuptake of iodinated thyroglobulin back into the thyroid
follicular cell
• Secretion of T4 into the blood
Slowly induced TSH effects
Changes that occur more slowly (hours or days) in response to TSH include:
• Increased blood flow to the thyroid gland
• Increased hypertrophy or hyperplasia of the thyroid cells, which initially
leads to increased size of the gland or goiter
Tests of Thyroid Function
• Determining the serum TSH is the first step in evaluating thyroid func
tion.
• Secondly, free T4 (FT4) measurements are now readily available and would
confirm an initial conclusion based on the TSH measurement. An alterna
tive test would be an index of the free T4 via resin uptake.
• Autoimmune thyroid disease is sometimes detected by measuring circulat
ing antibodies. Most notably are the TPO antibodies, which are elevated in
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (hypothyroidism) and Graves’ disease (hyperthy
roidism).
• Additional antibodies are those against thyroglobulin and the TSI anti
bodies that stimulate the TSH receptor in Graves’ disease.
• Uptake of iodine isotopes by the thyroid allows thyroid imaging and
quantitation of tracer uptake.
• Subacute thyroiditis: overall a below normal uptake of isotope
• Graves’ disease: increased tracer uptake that is distributed evenly through
out the enlarged gland
• Toxic adenomas: local areas of increased uptake with below normal uptake
in the remainder of the gland
• Toxic multinodular goiter: enlarged gland that often has an abnormal
architecture, with multiple areas of high and low uptake.
337
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 337 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Recall Question
Which of the following is correct regarding the effects of thyroid
hormone on the cardiovascular system?
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
A. Thyroid hormone acts to increase cardiac output by increasing
chronotropic and ionotropic effects on the heart.
B. Thyroid hormone acts on the AV node to directly increase the
Microbiology
heart rate.
C. In cases of thyroid hormone excess, total peripheral resistance
increases.
D. Thyroid hormone increases the affinity of alpha adrenergic
receptors in the heart.
E. In thyroid hormone excess, systolic pressure decreases while
diastolic pressure increases.
Answer: A
PATHOLOGIC CHANGES IN THYROID HORMONE
SECRETION
Table VII 8 1. Changes in Feedback Relationships in Several Disorders
T4 TSH TRH
Primary hypothyroidism ↓ ↑ ↑
Pituitary hypothyroidism ↓ ↓ ↑
(secondary)
Pituitary hyperthyroidism ↑ ↑ ↓
(secondary)
Graves’ disease ↑ ↓ ↓
(autoimmune)
A goiter can develop in all of the disorders shown in the preceding table except
secondary hypothyroidism.
338
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 338 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 8 | THYROID HORMONES
Thyroidal Response to Low Intake of Iodine
In most cases, if iodine is deficient in the diet but not absent, the individual will
remain euthyroid but will develop a goiter. The adaptive sequence occurs when
dietary intake of iodine is deficient. In the figure below, the sequence of events
begins with 1 (decreased secretion of T4) and proceeds through 4, the develop
ment of a goiter.
Thyrotrophs use plasma T4 as their source
for intracellular T3, thus intracellular T3 decreases.
This allows TSH secretion to increase.
1 When iodine intake is 4 The increased TSH increases iodide trapping,
deficient, the thyroid gland and to the extent that iodine is available,
makes more T3 and less T4. maintains T3 secretion. TSH also causes thyroid
hypertrophy and goiter.
Thyroid gland
3 Increased TSH
Plasma T3 remains normal 2 Plasma T4 is
decreased.
and is adequate to peripheral
target tissues (liver, kidney, heart).
Anterior pituitary gland
Figure X 8 9. IodiFniegure DVeIIfici8enc9y. Iodine Deficiency
339
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 339 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Primary Hypothyroidism
Primary changes and clinical presentation
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences • Most common cause is Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, an autoimmune destruc
tion of the thyroid with lymphocytic infiltration; ↑ TPO antibodies; early
stages have a diffusely enlarged thyroid progressing in the later stages to a
smaller atrophic and fibrotic gland.
Microbiology • ↑ TSH, ↓ FT4; in subclinical hypothyroidism the TSH is on the high side
of normal and the FT4 is on the low side of normal.
• Decreased basal metabolic rate and oxygen consumption
• Plasma cholesterol and other blood lipids tend to be elevated.
• Increased TRH drives a hyperprolactinemia. In women it may result in
amenorrhea with galactorrhea; more often anovulatory cycles with
menorrhagia. In men infertility and gynecomastia.
• Decreased GFR and an inability to excrete a water load, which may lead to
hyponatremia
• Inability to convert carotene to vitamin A may cause yellowing of the skin
and night blindness.
• Slow thinking and lethargy; some patients have severe mental symptoms,
dementia, or psychosis (“myxedema madness”)
• Decreased food intake but individuals tend to be overweight
• Deep tendon reflexes with slow relaxation phase
• In the early stages, a decreased cardiac performance due to diminished
contractility; in the later stages, cardiac features suggestive of cardiomy
opathy
• Anemia, constipation, hoarseness in speech, and the skin is dry and cool
• A decreased ventilatory drive to hypercapnia and hypoxia
• Accumulation of subcutaneous mucopolysaccharides that give rise to a
nonpitting edema (myxedema)
• Myxedema coma is the end stage of untreated hypothyroidism. The major
features are hypoventilation, fluid and electrolyte imbalances, and
hypothermia and ultimately shock and death.
Cretinism
Untreated postnatal hypothyroidism results in cretinism, a form of dwarfism with
intellectual disability.
• Individuals often appear normal following delivery but may display
some respiratory difficulty, jaundice, feeding problems, and hypotonia.
• Abnormalities rapidly develop in nervous system maturation, which are
irreversible and result in intellectual disability.
• Prepubertal growth, including bone ossification, is retarded in the absence
of thyroid hormones. A stippled epiphysis is a sign of hypothyroidism in
children.
340
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 340 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 8 | THYROID HORMONES
• There is no evidence that thyroid hormones act directly on growth or
bone formation. Rather, thyroid hormone appears to be permissive or act
synergistically with growth hormone or growth factors acting directly on
bone. Thyroid hormone is required for normal synthesis and secretion of
growth hormone.
• Acquired hypothyroidism during childhood results in dwarfism but there
is no intellectual disability.
• At puberty, increased androgen secretion drives an increased growth
hormone secretion. This will not occur with depressed levels of thyroid
hormones.
Additional causes of hypothyroidism
• Secondary generally associated with panhypopituitarism
• Secondary or tertiary characterized by ↓ FT4 and inappropriately normal
TSH.
• Severe iodine deficiency (not in the United States)
• Drug induced, e.g., lithium
• Failure to escape from the Wolff Chaikoff effect following excessive iodine
intake
• Resistance to thyroid hormone (rare)
Treatment
• Replacement doses of T4. The goal is to give enough T4 to normalize
serum TSH.
• Because metabolism of T4 decreases and the plasma half life increases
with age, higher doses of T4 are required in younger individuals.
• Overall levels of TSH must be checked on occasion to make sure of the
proper dosage of T4.
• In women beyond menopause, overprescribing T4 can contribute to the
development of osteoporosis.
Primary Hyperthyroidism (Graves’ Disease)
Thyrotoxicosis by definition is the clinical syndrome whereby tissues are exposed
to high levels of thyroid hormone (= hyperthyroidism). The most common cause
of thyrotoxicosis is Graves’ disease, a primary hyperthyroidism. Graves’ is an auto
immune problem in which one antibody is directed against the thyroid receptor. It
is referred to as the thyroid stimulating antibody (TSI or TSH R). TPO antibodies
and those against thyroglobulin are also found in Graves’.
• Increased FT4, decreased TSH (it is the TSI stimulating the TSH receptor
on the thyroid that is driving the hyperthyroidism)
• Symmetrically enlarged thyroid
• Increased radioiodine uptake by the thyroid and decreased serum
cholesterol
341
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 341 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
• Only Graves’ disease has thyroid stimulating antibodies. The only types of
hyperthyroidism with increased radioactive iodine uptake are Graves’
disease and toxic nodular goiter.
– Subacute thyroiditis and “silent” or “painless” thyroiditis do not have
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
increased radioactive iodine uptake; they are “leaking” thyroid hor
mone out of a gland damaged by antibodies.
• Increased metabolic rate and heat production (patients tend to seek a cool
environment)
Microbiology
• Increased cardiac output, contractility, and heart rate with possible
palpitations and arrhythmias (increased β adrenergic stimulation)
• Many symptoms suggest a state of excess catecholamines but circulating
catecholamines are usually normal.
• Weight loss with increased food intake, protein wasting, and muscle
weakness
• Tremor, nervousness, and excessive sweating
• Wide eyed stare (exophthalmos) seen in patients, caused by an infiltration
of orbital soft tissues and extraocular muscles and the resulting edema
(this process is caused by the antibodies)
Untreated hyperthyroidism may decompensate into a condition called “thyroid
storm.”
The end stage of Graves’ disease is often a hypothyroidism.
Acute treatment
• Beta blockers are most rapid in effect
• Methimazole or propylthiouracil stops the production of hormone
• Iodine in high dose stops incorporation of iodine into the gland
• Steroids such as dexamethasone stop conversion of T4 to T3
• Long term permanent cure is ablation of the gland with radioactive iodine
Additional origins of hyperthyroidism (thyrotoxicosis)
• Autonomously functioning thyroid adenoma
• Toxic multinodular goiter
• Subacute and silent thyroiditis
• TSH secreting pituitary adenoma (secondary hyperthyroidism) (very rare)
342
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 342 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 8 | THYROID HORMONES
Goiter
A goiter is simply an enlarged thyroid and does not designate functional status.
It can be present in hypo , hyper , and euthyroid states.
There is no correlation between thyroid size and function.
• A generalized enlargement of the thyroid is considered a “diffuse goiter.”
• Diffuse enlargement often results from prolonged stimulation by TSH or
TSH like factor; e.g., Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, Graves’ disease, diet defi
cient in iodine
• An irregular or lumpy enlargement of the thyroid is considered a “nodular
goiter.”
• With time, excessive stimulation by TSH can result in a multinodular
goiter e.g. iodine deficiency initially produces a diffuse nontoxic goiter.
Long term however, focal hyperplasia with necrosis and hemorrhage
results in the formation of nodules. Nodules vary from “hot nodules” that
can trap iodine to “cold nodules” that cannot trap iodine.
343
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 343 15/10/22 2:22P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 344 15/10/22 2:22P
Growth, Growth Hormone,
9#
and Puberty
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Explain information related to in utero and prepubertal growth
❏ Explain information related to physiologic actions of growth hormone
❏ Use knowledge of control of growth hormone secretion
❏ Answer questions about puberty
❏ Use knowledge of acromegaly
IN UTERO AND PREPUBERTAL GROWTH
Intrauterine Growth
• Important roles for growth hormone, IGF II (early in gestation), IGF I
(later in gestation) and insulin
• Infants of diabetic mothers have increased insulin levels and are large.
• Smoking decreases vascularity of the placenta and decreases birth weight.
• Poor maternal nutrition is the leading cause of low birth weight world
wide.
Postnatal Growth
Although fetal hypothyroidism does not decrease birth weight, hypothyroidism
following delivery causes irreversible abnormalities in nervous system maturation,
which in turn leads to cretinism.
• Growth hormone, insulin, and thyroid hormone play major roles.
Acquired hypothyroidism later in childhood will slow growth and reduce
bone advancement more than growth hormone deficiency, but will not
cause intellectual disability.
• Replacement of hormone deficiencies creates a period of catch up growth,
but it is soon replaced with a normal growth rate.
• There is no major role for gonadal sex steroids on prepubertal growth or
for glucocorticoids, but glucocorticoid excess will slow growth.
• Hypersecretion of growth hormone pre puberty (pituitary adenoma)
results in giantism. It also delays pubertal changes, and the subsequent
hypogonadism contributes to the giantism.
345
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 345 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Prepubertal Growth Hormone Deficiency
• Deficiencies can be congenital (decreased birth length), idiopathic (low
GHRH), or acquired (hypothalamic pituitary tumor).
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences • A deficiency causes dwarfism, which is characterized by short stature,
chubby, immature facial appearance, delayed skeletal maturation, and
tendency for episodes of hypoglycemia.
• Tissue resistance to growth hormone (↑ growth hormone, ↓ IGF I) results
Microbiology in Laron syndrome (Laron dwarfism).
• Stimulation test is with an arginine infusion.
• Growth hormone deficiency following puberty decreases lean body mass,
and replacement therapy is now considered an acceptable treatment.
• Treatment of GH deficiency is simple replacement of GH.
• Treatment of Laron dwarfism (lack of GH receptor) is synthetic IGF.
Mecasermin is the name of recombinant IGF.
PHYSIOLOGIC ACTIONS OF GROWTH HORMONE
Growth hormone is a major anabolic growth promoting hormone and a stress
hormone. All anabolic hormones (i.e., growth hormone, insulin, thyroid hor
mones, and androgens) are required for normal growth. The major stress and
anabolic actions of growth hormone are shown below. The figure shows that most
of the direct actions of growth hormone are consistent with its actions as a stress
hormone.
A direct anabolic action is the promotion of amino acid entry into cells, thus making
them more available for protein synthesis. However, most of the anabolic actions of
growth hormone are indirect via the production of growth factors.
346
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 346 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 9 | GROWTH, GROWTH HORMONE, AND PUBERTY
GHRH* SST
Hypothalamus
(–)
Somatotroph GHRH =GHgrRoHwth= ghroowrmthone hormroenleeasingreleasing
(+)
hormone
hormone
SST = somatostatin
SST = somatostatin
Growth hormone
• Peptide hormone
Direct anabolic Indirect anabolic
Direct catabolic effects
effects (growth) effects (growth)
1. Decreases uptake • Increased uptake • Via IGF
of glucose in fat and of a.a. into cells
muscle ∴ raises blood
glucose
2. Mobilizes fats by
increasing the activity
of hormone sensitive
lipase ∴ raises free
fatty acids
• In growth hormone
deficiency, body
fat increases *Dominant hypothalamic factor
Figure FigureX V9II19. 1O.veOrvvieerwview ofoGfrowGtrhowthHormoneHormone
Indirect Anabolic Actions of Growth Hormone
Most of the anabolic actions of growth hormone are an indirect result of increased
production of insulin like growth factors (IGFs). A major growth factor is IGF I.
The steps in the production and release of IGF I are shown below.
acts Increased production
Liver and other tissues Growth factors
GH
on (e.g., skeletal muscle) and release of (especially IGF I)
Figure X 9 2. IGF Mediated Effects of Growth Hormone
Figure VII 9 2. IGF Mediated Effects of Growth Hormone
347
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 347 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Specific Properties of the IGFs
IGF I is a major anabolic growth factor. It has the following characteristics:
• A circulating peptide growth factor similar in structure to proinsulin and
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences has some insulin like activity.
• Circulates in the blood tightly bound to a large protein, whose production
is also dependent on growth hormone. Protein binding increases the
half life and thus serves as a better 24 hour marker of GH (half life 15–20
Microbiology minutes).
• The major known anabolic effect of IGF I is that it increases the synthesis
of cartilage (chondrogenesis) in the epiphyseal plates of long bones,
thereby increasing bone length.
• It is also hypothesized that circulating IGFs increase lean body mass. The
decreased lean body mass of aging may, in part, be due to the concomitant
decrease in IGFs. IGFs also decrease in catabolic states, especially protein
calorie malnutrition.
• IGF II is another growth factor, the importance of which is not well
understood but may have a role in fetal development.
CONTROL OF GROWTH HORMONE (GH) SECRETION
• GH secretion is pulsatile. The secretory pulses are much more likely to
occur during the night in stages III and IV (non REM) of sleep than
during the day.
• Secretion of GH requires the presence of normal plasma levels of thyroid
hormones. GH secretion is markedly reduced in hypothyroid individuals.
• During the sixth decade of life and later, GH secretion diminishes consid
erably in both men and women. What initiates this decrease is unknown.
Each of the promoters could act by increasing GHRH secretion, decreasing SST
secretion, or both.
Notice that most of the factors that regulate GH secretion are identical to those
that regulate glucagon (except for those boxed). These factors are consistent with
their shared role as stress hormones.
The inhibitory effect of IGF I represents a negative feedback loop to the
hypothalamus.
348
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 348 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 9 | GROWTH, GROWTH HORMONE, AND PUBERTY
Factors that Factors that
Inhibit GH secretion Promote GH secretion
(+)
(+) SST GHRH (–)
IGF 1 Deep sleep SST: somatostatin
SST: somatostatin
Elevated glucose Hypoglycemia
Exercise
Amino acids,
Ghrelin
e.g., arginine, leucine
Pituitary
somatotrophs
Growth hormone
FigureFigure XVII993.3. CCoonnttrrooll of GofrowGthrowtHhormoneHormSeocnreetion Secretion
PUBERTY
Reproductive Changes
Hypothalamic pulse generator increases activity just before physical changes at
puberty.
In females, the initial sign of puberty is breast development–first with estrogen
(promotes duct growth) and then with progesterone (promotes development of
milk producing alveolar cells). In males, the initial sign is enlargement of the testes
(mainly FSH stimulating seminiferous tubules).
Pubic hair development in males and females is dependent on androgen.
Growth Changes
During puberty, androgens promote the secretion in the following anabolic
sequence: At puberty, if T4 is normal, ↑ androgens drive ↑ growth hormone,
which drives ↑ IGF I.
• IGF I is the major stimulus for cell division of the cartilage synthesizing
cells located in the epiphyseal plates of long bones.
• In males, the increased androgen arises from the testes (testosterone); in
females, from the adrenals (adrenarche).
• Near the end of puberty, androgens promote the mineralization (fusion or
closure) of the epiphyseal plates of long bones. Estrogen can also cause
plate closure, even in men.
• In females, the growth spurt begins early in puberty and is near comple
tion by menarche. In males, the growth spurt develops near the end of
puberty.
349
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 349 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
ACROMEGALY
Acromegaly is caused by a post pubertal excessive secretion of growth hormone. It
is almost always due to a macroadenoma (>1 cm diameter) of the anterior pituitary
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences and second in frequency to prolactinomas.
• Slow onset of symptoms; disease usually present for 5–10 years before
diagnosis
• Ectopic GHRH secretion (rare)
Microbiology
• Some tumors contain lactotrophs, and elevated prolactin can cause
hypogonadism and galactorrhea.
• Increased IGF I causes most of the deleterious effects of acromegaly, but
growth hormone excess directly causes the hyperglycemia and insulin
resistance.
• Characteristic proliferation of cartilage, bone and soft tissue, visceral, and
cardiomegaly
• Observable changes include enlargement of the hands and feet (acral
parts); coarsening of facial features (including downward and forward
growth of mandible); increased hat size.
• Measurement of IGF I is a useful screening measure and confirms
diagnosis with the lack of growth hormone suppression by oral glucose.
• Diagnosis: confirm the following before treatment is started: elevated IGF,
failed suppression of GH/IGF after giving glucose, MRI showing lesion
in brain in pituitary
• Never start with a scan in endocrinology. Benign pituitary “inciden
taloma” is common in 2–10% of the population. Always confirm the
presence of an overproduction of a hormone before doing a scan. This is
true for adrenal lesions as well.
• Treatment:
– Surgical removal by trans sphenoidal approach is first. Removal of an
over producing adenoma is the first treatment in most of endocrinol
ogy with the exception of prolactinoma.
– If surgical removal fails, use the growth hormone receptor antagonist,
pegvisomant, or octreotide. Octreotide is synthetic somatostatin.
Cabergoline is a dopamine agonist used when other medications have
failed.
– Radiation is used last, only after surgery, pegvisomant, octreotide and
cabergoline have failed.
350
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 350 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 9 | GROWTH, GROWTH HORMONE, AND PUBERTY
Recall Question
Which of the following is correct about the control of growth
hormone (GH) secretion?
A. Continuous and slow
B. Occurs in the early stages of sleep during stage 1 and 2
C. Depends on thyroid hormone plasma levels
D. Accelerates during decade 6 of life
E. Depends on plasma insulin levels
Answer: C
351
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 351 15/10/22 2:22P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 352 15/10/22 2:22P
10 #
Male Reproductive System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Solve problems concerning hypothalamic pituitary gonadal axis in
males
❏ Solve problems concerning age related hormonal changes in males
❏ Demonstrate understanding of erection, emission, and ejaculation
❏ Use knowledge of gonadal dysfunction in the male
HYPOTHALAMIC PITUITARY GONADAL (HPG) AXIS IN MALES NOTE
The factors involved in the overall control of adult male hormone secretion can be LH, FSH, TSH, and human chorionic
seen below. gonadotropin (hCG) are glycoproteins with
identical alpha subunits. The beta subunits
differ and thus confer specificity.
353
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 353 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
GnRH
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
GnRH—synthesized in arcuate/preoptic
Microbiology
regions of hypothalamus and secreted in
pulses into hypophyseal portal vessels
(–) • produces pulsatile release of LH
LH FSH
and FSH
(–) • pulsatile release of GnRH prevents
Inhibin B downregulation of its receptors in
anterior pituitary
Leydig Sertoli cell LH and FSH—produced and secreted
Cholesterol
by gonadotrophs of anterior pituitary
• LH stimulates Leydig cells to
Testosterone
produce testosterone.
DHT Testosterone
• FSH stimulates Sertoli cells
(see below).
Nurse cell for sperm
Leydig cell testosterone—some
Testosterone
and DHT circulates attached to protein—mainly diffuses directly to Sertoli cells, where
testosterone–estrogen binding globulin
in blood it is required for Sertoli cell function.
• produces negative feedback for LH
Some androgen target cells
DHT Sertoli cell inhibin B—produces
negative feedback for FSH
5 -Reductase
Dihydrotestosterone (DHT)
(a more active form of testosterone)
Figure VII 10 1. Control of Testes
Figure X 10 1. Control of Testes
354
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 354 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 10 | MALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
LH/Leydig Cells
Leydig cells express receptors for luteinizing hormone (LH). LH is a peptide hor
mone that activates Gs -cAMP, which in turn initiates testosterone production by
activating steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR).
• Testosterone diffuses into Sertoli cells (high concentration) and into the
blood.
• Circulating testosterone provides negative feedback to regulate LH
secretion at the level of the hypothalamus and anterior pituitary.
• Leydig cells aromatize some of this testosterone into estradiol.
5α reductase
Some target tissues express the enzyme 5α reductase, which converts testosterone
into the more potent dihydrotestosterone. Some important physiologic effects pri
marily mediated by dihydrotestosterone are as follows:
• Sexual differentiation: differentiation to form male external genitalia
• Growth of the prostate
• Male pattern baldness
• Increased activity of sebaceous glands
• Synthesis of NO synthase in penile tissue
FSH/Sertoli Cells
FSH binds to Sertoli cells and activates a Gs -cAMP pathway. Sertoli cells release
inhibin B, which has negative feedback on FSH secretion.
355
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 355 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Hormonal Control of Testicular Function
The figure below illustrates the source and nature of the hormones controlling
testicular function.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Pituitary
LH
Microbiology To pituitary
cAMP feedback
Leydig Cell inhibition
Protein kinase A
NOTE Cholesterol
Nucleus
Sertoli cells provide the nourishment Pregnenolone
required for normal spermatogenesis. Secreted
Estradiol Testosterone
testosterone
• FSH, along with a very high level of Aromatase
testosterone from the neighboring FSH
Leydig cells, produces growth factors
necessary for growth and maturation
Testosterone
of the sperm.
• FSH and testosterone induce the Growth
cAMP Nucleus
synthesis of androgen binding protein, factors
which helps maintain high local levels
Sertoli cell
of testosterone.
Androgen
• Leydig cells express aromatase, which Inhibin B binding
protein
Developing
aromatizes testosterone into estradiol,
germ cell
an important hormone for growth and
maturation of the sperm.
Estradiol
• Sertoli cells secrete inhibin B, which
produces feedback regulation on FSH.
Lumen of
seminiferous tubule Mature sperm
Figure VII10 2. Endocrine Function of Testes
Figure X 10 2. Endocrine Function of Testes
356
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 356 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 10 | MALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
Definitions
Androgen: any steroid that controls the development and maintenance of mascu
line characteristics
Testosterone: a natural male androgen of testicular origin, controlled by the LH
Dihydrotestosterone: a more active form of testosterone made by 5 alpha
reductase; makes the penis, prostate, and scrotum on an embryo
Methyl testosterone: a synthetic androgen, which is an anabolic steroid some
times used by athletes
Adrenal androgens: natural weak androgens (male and female) of adrenal origin,
controlled by ACTH: DHEA and androstenedione
Inhibins: peptide hormones secreted into the blood; inhibit the secretion of FSH
by pituitary gonadotrophs
Aromatase: an enzyme that stimulates the aromatization of the A ring of
testosterone, converting it into estradiol
• Other than spermatogenesis, the physiologic importance of this conversion
is not understood.
• However, ~35% of the estradiol in a man’s blood arises from the testes, and
the remainder arises from peripheral conversion of testosterone to
estradiol by an aromatase present in adipose tissue.
AGE RELATED HORMONAL CHANGES IN MALES
The relative plasma LH and testosterone concentrations throughout the life of the
normal human male can be seen below.
4 5
1
3 Testosterone
LH
2
Fetal Birth Puberty Adult Aging
life adult
Figure X 10 3. Development and Aging in Male Reproduction
Figure VII10 3. Development and Aging in Male Reproduction
357
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 357 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
1: Fetal life
The development of male and female internal and external structures depends on
the fetal hormonal environment. The Wolffian and Müllerian ducts are initially
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences present in both male and female fetuses. If there is no hormonal input (the
situation in the normal female fetus), female internal and female external struc
tures develop (Müllerian ducts develop, Wolffian ducts regress).
Normal male development requires the presence of 3 hormones: testosterone, dihy
Microbiology drotestosterone, and the Müllerian inhibiting factor (MIF).
• (hCG) + LH → Leydig cells → testosterone → Wolffian ducts
5 α reductase
• testosterone → dihydrotestosterone → urogenital sinus & genital organs
• Sertoli cells → MIF → absence of female internal structures
MIF prevents the development of the Müllerian ducts, which would otherwise dif
ferentiate into female internal structures. In the absence of MIF, the Müllerian ducts
develop. Thus, in addition to normal male structures, a uterus will be present.
• Wolffian ducts differentiate into the majority of male internal structures;
namely, epididymis, vas deferens, and seminal vesicles.
– In the absence of testosterone, the Wolffian ducts regress.
• Dihydrotestosterone induces the urogenital sinus and genital tubercle to
differentiate into the external scrotum, penis, and prostate gland.
– In the absence of dihydrotestosterone, female external structures
develop.
2: Childhood
Within a few months after birth, LH and testosterone drop to low levels and
remain low until puberty. The cause of this prolonged quiescence of reproductive
hormone secretion during childhood is not known. Interestingly, LH secretion
remains low in spite of low testosterone.
3: Puberty
Near the onset of puberty, the amplitude of the LH pulses becomes greater, driving
the mean level of LH higher. Early in puberty, this potentiation of the LH pulses is
especially pronounced during sleep. This increased LH stimulates the Leydig cells
to again secrete testosterone.
4: Adult
During adulthood, LH secretion drives testosterone secretion. Thus, it is not
surprising that the relative levels of the two hormones parallel one another.
5: Aging adult
Testosterone and inhibin secretions decrease with age. Men in their seventies
generally secrete only 60–70% as much testosterone as do men in their twenties.
Nevertheless, there is no abrupt decrease in testosterone secretion in men that
parallels the relatively abrupt decrease in estrogen secretion that women experi
ence at menopause. The loss of feedback will cause an increase in LH and FSH
secretion.
358
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 358 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 10 | MALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
Effect on Muscle Mass
The capacity of androgens to stimulate protein synthesis and decrease protein
breakdown, especially in muscle, is responsible for the larger muscle mass in men
as compared with women. Exogenous androgens (anabolic steroids) are sometimes
taken by men and women in an attempt to increase muscle mass.
Spermatogenesis Is Temperature Dependent
Effect on fertility
For unknown reasons, spermatogenesis ceases at temperatures typical of the
abdominal cavity. Thus, when the testes fail to descend before or shortly after
birth, and the condition (cryptorchidism) is not surgically corrected, infertility
results.
Normally, the scrotum provides an environment that is 4°C cooler than the
abdominal cavity. The cooling is accomplished by acountercurrent heat exchang
er located in the spermatic cord. Also, the temperature of the scrotum and the
testes is regulated by the relative degree of contraction or relaxation of the cremas
teric muscles and scrotal skin rugae that surround and suspend the testes.
Effect on FSH and LH
Sertoli cells, and therefore germ cell maturation, are adversely affected by
the elevated temperatures of cryptorchid testes. In adults with bilaterally unde
scended testes, FSH secretion is elevated, probably as a result of decreased Sertoli
cell production of inhibins. Testosterone secretion by the Leydig cells of cryptor
chid testes also tends to be low, and as a result, LH secretion of adults with bilateral
cryptorchidism is elevated.
ERECTION, EMISSION, AND EJACULATION
Erection
Erection is caused by dilation of the blood vessels (a parasympathetic response) in
the erectile tissue of the penis (the corpora and ischiocavernous sinuses). This
dilation increases the inflow of blood so much that the penile veins get compressed
between the engorged cavernous spaces and the Buck’s and dartos fasciae.
Nitric oxide (NO), working through cGMP, mediates the vasodilation.
Emission
Emission is the movement of semen from the epididymis, vas deferens, seminal
vesicles, and prostate to the ejaculatory ducts. The movement is mediated by sym
pathetic (thoracolumbar) adrenergic transmitters.
• Simultaneously with emission, there is also a sympathetic adrenergic
mediated contraction of the internal sphincter of the bladder, which
prevents retrograde ejaculation of semen into the bladder. Destruction of
this sphincter by prostatectomy often results in retrograde ejaculation.
• Emission normally precedes ejaculation but also continues during
ejaculation.
359
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 359 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Ejaculation
Ejaculation is caused by the rhythmic contraction of the bulbospongiosus and the
ischiocavernous muscles that surround the base of the penis. Contraction of these
striated muscles, innervated by somatic motor nerves, causes the semen to exit
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
rapidly in the direction of least resistance, i.e., outwardly through the urethra.
Table VII 10 1. Hormonal Changes in Specific Altered States
Microbiology Sex Steroids LH FSH
Primary hypogonadism (Noonan/ ↓ ↑ ↑
Klinefelter syndrome)
Pituitary hypogonadism ↓ ↓ ↓
Kallmann (↓ GnRH) ↓ ↓ ↓
Anabolic steroid therapy (male)*
↑ ↓ (↓)
Androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS) ↑ ↑ ↑
Inhibin infusion (male)† − − ↓
GnRH infusion (constant rate)‡ ↓ ↓ ↓
GnRH infusion (pulsatile) ↑ ↑ ↑
*LH suppression causes Leydig cell atrophy in an adult male and therefore reduced
testicular androgen production. Because Leydig cell testosterone is required for
spermatogenesis, anabolic steroids suppress spermatogenesis.
Although testosterone is not the normal feedback regulating FSH, high circulating
testosterone activity will suppress the release of FSH.
†Because FSH is required for spermatogenesis, giving inhibin suppresses
spermatogenesis.
‡A constant rate of infusion of the gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) will cause a
transient increase in LH and FSH secretion, followed by a decrease caused by the
downregulation of gonadotroph receptors.
Recall Question
Which of the following is correct about the physiologic function of
aromatase?
A. It is an enzyme that stimulates the conversion of testosterone
into estradiol.
B. It is a natural weak androgen.
C. It controls and maintains the masculine characteristics.
D. It is responsible for male erection.
E. A deficiency of it causes Noonan syndrome.
Answer: A
360
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 360 15/10/22 2:22P
11 #
Female Reproductive System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Interpret scenarios on menstrual cycle
❏ Explain information related to female sex steroid metabolism and
excretion
❏ Answer questions about menstrual irregularities
❏ Explain information related to pregnancy
❏ Solve problems concerning lactation
MENSTRUAL CYCLE
The Phases
The menstrual cycle (~28 days) can be divided into the following phases or events:
NOTE
• Follicular phase (first 2 weeks) is also called the proliferative or preovula
tory phase. This phase is dominated by the peripheral effects of estrogen, By convention, the first day of bleeding
which include the replacement of the endometrial cells lost during menses.
(menses) is called day 1 of the menstrual
• Ovulation (~day 14) is preceded by the LH surge, which induces ovula cycle.
tion.
• Luteal phase (~2 weeks) is dominated by the elevated plasma levels of
progesterone, and along with lower levels of secreted estrogen creates
a secretory and quiescent endometrium that prepares the uterus for
implantation.
• Menses. Withdrawal of the hormonal support of the endometrium at this
time causes necrosis and menstruation.
Follicular phase (~days 1–14)
During the follicular phase, FSH secretion is slightly elevated, causing proliferation
of granulosa cells and increased estrogen secretion within a cohort of follicles.
One follicle has greater cellular growth and secretes more estradiol (dominant
follicle). Estradiol promotes growth and increased sensitivity to FSH; thus the
follicle continues to develop. The remaining follicles, lacking sufficient FSH,
synthesize only androgen and become atretic (die).
361
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 361 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
The graphs below illustrate the plasma hormonal levels throughout the menstrual
cycle. The length of the menstrual cycle varies, but an average length is 28 days.
Each plasma hormone concentration is plotted relative to the day on which its
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences concentration is lowest, i.e., just prior to menses (day 28).
10X LH Plasma FSH
Microbiology Plasma LH Follicular Luteal relative to level
relative to level phase phase on day 28
on day 28
3X
1X FSH 1X
Progesterone
5X 40X
Plasma estradiol
Plasma progesterone
relative to level
relative to level on
on day 28
day 28
Estradiol
1X
1X
MENSES
1 9 14 16 23 28
Day of the Menstrual Cycle
GnRH
LH
(–) (–)
FSH
cAMP Cholesterol cAMP
Inhibin B
Protein kinase
Protein Estrogen
kinase
Pregnenolone Aromatase
Androgen Estrogen
(+)
Theca cell Granulosa cell
Figure VII11 1. Follicular Phase Relationships (Approximately Days 1–14)
Figure X 11 1. Follicular Phase Relationships Approximately Days 1 to 14
362
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 362 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 11 | FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
Theca Cells: Under LH stimulation, which acts intracellularly via cAMP, choles
terol is transported into the mitochondria (StAR is activated). The pathway
continues through intermediates to androgens. Little androgen is secreted into the
blood; most of the androgen enters the adjacent granulosa cells.
Granulosa Cells: Possess the follicle’s only FSH receptors. When coupled to FSH,
these act via cAMP to increase the activity of aromatase; aromatase converts the
androgens to estrogens (mainly estradiol).
Estrogen: Some of the estrogen produced by the granulosa cells is released into the
blood and inhibits the release of LH and FSH from the anterior pituitary. However,
another fraction of the estrogen acts locally on granulosa cells, increasing their
proliferation and sensitivity to FSH.
• This local positive effect of estrogens causes a rising level of circulating
estrogens during the follicular phase, but at the same time FSH is decreas
ing because of the inhibitory effect of estrogen on FSH release.
• Granulosa cells also release inhibin B.
• Inhibin B inhibits the secretion of FSH by the pituitary but its role in the
menstrual cycle is poorly understood.
Peripheral effects of estrogen produced by the granulosa cells during the follicular
phase include:
• Circulating estrogens stimulate the female sex accessory organs and
secondary sex characteristics.
• Rising levels of estrogens cause the endometrial cells of the uterine
mucosal layers to increase their rate of mitotic division (proliferate).
• Estrogens up regulate progesterone receptors in the myometrium.
• Circulating estrogens cause the cervical mucus to be thin and watery,
making the cervix easy for sperm to traverse.
Ovulation
Ovulation takes place at approximately day 14. Since ovulation is always 14 days
before the end of the cycle, you can subtract 14 from the cycle length to find the
day of ovulation.
Cycle length − 14 = ovulation day
363
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 363 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Ovulation
10X LH Plasma FSH
Plasma LH Follicular Luteal relative to level
Pathology re B la e ti h v a e vioraSlcien to ce/S l o e c v i e aS l lciences phase phase on day 28
on day 28
3X
1X FSH 1X
Microbiology
Progesterone
5X 40X
Plasma estradiol
Plasma progesterone
relative to level
relative to level on
on day 28
day 28
Estradiol
1X
1X
MENSES
1 9 14 16 23 28
Day of the Menstrual Cycle
Ovulation occurs approximately day 14
Pituitary
LH
(+) (+)
FSH
High circulating
estrogen
Androgen Estrogen
(+)
LH surge FSH surge
Induces
ovulation
Figure VII11 2. Pituitary Ovarian Relationships at Ovulation
Figure X 11 2. Pituitary Ovarian Relationships at Ovulation
364
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 364 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 11 | FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
Estrogen Levels
Near the end of the follicular phase, there is a dramatic rise in circulating estrogen.
When estrogens rise above a certain level, they no longer inhibit the release of LH
and FSH. Instead, they stimulate the release of LH and FSH (negative feedback
loop to positive feedback loop).
This causes a surge in the release of LH and FSH. Only the LH surge is essential for
the induction of ovulation and formation of the corpus luteum. Note that the LH
surge and ovulation occur after estrogen peaks so if estrogens are still rising,
ovulation has not occurred.
Follicular rupture occurs 24–36 hours after the onset of the LH surge. During this
time interval, LH removes the restraint upon meiosis, which has been arrested in
prophase for years. The first meiotic division is completed, and the first polar body
is extruded.
Positive feedback loops are rare in the body. Ovulation with estrogen and parturi
tion with oxytocin are examples of positive feedback loops.
365
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 365 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Luteal phase (~days 14–28)
10X LH Plasma FSH
Pathology BehavioPrlaaSlscmieance/SociaSlLciHences Follicular Luteal relative to level
relative to level phase phase on day 28
on day 28 3X
Microbiology
1X FSH 1X
Progesterone
5X 40X
Plasma estradiol
Plasma progesterone
relative to level
relative to level on
on day 28
day 28
Estradiol
1X 1X
MENSES
1 9 14 16 23 28
Day of the Menstrual Cycle
Luteinization of the preovulatory follicle
LH FSH LH
(+) Cholesterol
Cholesterol (+)
(+) Inhibins
Progesterone
Progesterone (+)
Aromatase
(+)
Androgen Androgen Estrogen
(+)
Theca cell Granulosa cell
LH
surge
(+)
Luteal cells LH
(+)
Considerable progesterone and some estrogen
Figure VII 11 3. The Luteal Phase Reactions
Figure X 11 3. The Luteal Phase Reactions
366
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 366 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 11 | FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
Preovulatory Follicle
In the latter stages of the follicular phase, intracellular changes within the granu
losa and theca cells occur in preparation for their conversion into luteal cells.
• Estradiol, in conjunction with FSH, causes the granulosa cells to produce
LH receptors.
• The metabolic pathways are then altered to favor the production of proges
terone.
• This would include a decrease in the activity of aromatase and a drop in
estrogen production.
LH Surge
Induced by the elevated estrogens, it causes the granulosa cells and theca cells to
be transformed into luteal cells and increases the secretion of progesterone.
Corpus Luteum
The process of luteinization occurs following the exit of the oocyte from the
follicle. The corpus luteum is made up of the remaining granulosa cells, thecal
cells, and supportive tissue. Once formed, the luteal cells are stimulated by LH to
secrete considerable progesterone and some estrogen. Progesterone inhibits LH
secretion (negative feedback). The corpus luteum secretes inhibin A, which has
negative feedback on FSH.
The increased plasma level of progesterone has several actions:
• It causes the uterine endometrium to become secretory, providing a source
of nutrients for the blastocyst.
• It causes the cervical mucus to become thick, sealing off the uterus from
further entry of sperm or bacteria.
• It has thermogenic properties, causing the basal body temperature to
increase by 0.5–1.0° F.
367
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 367 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Menses
10X LH Plasma FSH
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences Plasma LH Follicular Luteal relative
relative phase phase to level
to level on day 28
on day 28 3X
Microbiology 1X FSH 1X
Progesterone
5X 40X
*
Plasma
Plasma
estradiol
progesterone
relative
relative to level
to level
Estradiol on day 28
on day 28
1X 1X
MENSES
1 9 14 16 23 28
Day of the Menstrual Cycle
*The fall in sex steroids causes menses.
Figure X 11 4. Onset of Menses
Figure VII11 4. Onset of Menses
• The life of the corpus luteum is finite, hence the luteal phase is only 14
days.
• Initially, the corpus luteum is very responsive to LH. Over time however,
as the corpus luteum becomes less functional, it becomes less responsive to
LH.
• Progesterone exerts negative feedback on LH, which contributes to the
demise of the corpus luteum.
• With the demise of the corpus luteum, progesterone and estradiol fall to
levels that are unable to support the endometrial changes, and menses
begins.
Menstruation is due to a lack of gonadal sex steroids.
FEMALE SEX STEROID METABOLISM AND EXCRETION
Solubilization and Excretion
The female sex steroids undergo oxidation or reduction in the liver (and other
target tissues), and a glucuronide or sulfate group is attached to the steroidal
metabolite. This “conjugation” increases the solubility of the steroids in water, and
thus they are excreted in the urine.
Estradiol can be excreted as a conjugate of estradiol, but most is first converted to
estrone or estriol.
Progesterone is converted in the liver to pregnanediol and is excreted as pregnane
diol glucuronide.
368
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 368 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 11 | FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
Monitoring the Menstrual Cycle
The amount of sex steroids excreted in the urine can be used to monitor the men
strual cycle. For example:
• Low progesterone metabolites and low but slowly rising estrogen metabo
lites characterize the early follicular phase.
• Low progesterone metabolites and rapidly rising estrogen metabolites
characterize the latter part of the follicular phase just before ovulation.
• Elevated levels of progesterone metabolites characterize the luteal phase
and pregnancy. In the early luteal phase, progesterone is rising, while in
the latter half it is falling.
Estrogens and Androgen Formation
• Estrogen: generic term for any estrus producing hormone, natural or
synthetic
• 17 β estradiol: major hormone secreted by the ovarian follicle
• Estrone: some is secreted from the ovary but much is formed in peripheral
tissues such as adipose tissue from androgens. These androgens originate
from both the ovary and the adrenal glands. This is the main circulating
estrogen following menopause. Fat cells have aromatase. Adipose tissue
creates modest levels of estrogen.
• Estriol: major estrogen synthesized from circulating androgens by the
placenta
• Potency: estradiol > estrone > estriol
• Androgens: The follicles also secrete androgen; DHEA, androstenedione,
and testosterone. Additional testosterone production is from the periph
eral conversion of adrenal and ovarian androgen. Some testosterone is also
converted via 5 α reductase to dihydrotestosterone in the skin.
New Cycle
During the 3 days prior to and during menses, plasma levels of progesterone and
estradiol are at their low point; negative feedback restraint for gonadotropin
secretion is removed. FSH secretion rises slightly and initiates the next cycle of
follicular growth.
The length of the follicular phase of the menstrual cycle is more variable than the
length of the luteal phase. Long cycles are usually due to a prolonged follicular
phase and short cycles to a short follicular phase. Once ovulation has occurred,
menses generally follows in about 14 days. The length of the menstrual cycle in
days minus 14 gives the most likely day of ovulation.
369
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 369 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Recall Question
Which of the following is the physiologic cause of menstruation?
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences A. LH surge increasing the secretion of progesterone
B. Rising levels of estrogen causing endometrial cells of the
uterine to proliferate
Microbiology C. Withdrawal of hormonal support of the endometrium
D. LH removing the restraint on meiosis
E. Increase in plasma levels of progesterone
Answer: C
MENSTRUAL IRREGULARITIES
Amenorrhea
Amenorrhea is the lack of menstrual bleeding. Though in itself it does not cause
harm, it may be a sign of genetic, endocrine, or anatomic abnormalities.
• In the absence of anatomic abnormalities (and pregnancy), it usually
indicates a disruption of the hypothalamic–pituitary axis or an ovarian
problem.
• A hypothalamic–pituitary origin would include Kallmann syndrome,
functional hypothalamic amenorrhea, amenorrhea in female athletes,
eating disorders, hypothyroidism (possibly because high TRH stimulates
prolactin), and pituitary tumors such as prolactinomas.
• Ovarian causes could be premature ovarian failure (premature meno
pause), repetitive ovulation failure, anovulation (intermittent bleeding), or
a polycystic ovary.
Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome
Polycystic ovarian syndrome is characterized by an elevated LH/FSH ratio.
• Clinical signs include infertility, hirsutism, obesity, insulin resistance, and
amenorrhea and oligomenorrhea.
• The enlarged polycystic ovaries are known to be associated with increased
androgen levels (DHEA).
• It typically originates in obese girls. The high extraglandular estrogens
(mainly estrone) may selectively suppress FSH. Ovarian follicles have a
suppressed aromatase activity and thus a diminished capacity to convert
androgen into estrogen, but the adrenals may also contribute to the excess
androgens as well.
• High androgens promote atresia in developing follicles and disrupt
feedback relationships. Look for high LH and DHEA levels.
• The overall result is anovulation induced amenorrhea with an
estrogen induced endometrial hyperplasia and breakthrough bleeding.
370
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 370 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 11 | FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
• Although poorly understood, the hyperinsulinemia is believed to be a key
etiologic factor.
• Treat insulin insensitivity with metformin, which can also help restore
menstrual cycles.
• Treat androgenization with spironolactone.
Hirsutism
Hirsutism is an excessive, generally male, pattern of hair growth. It is often associ
ated with conditions of androgen excess, e.g., congenital adrenal hyperplasia and
polycystic ovarian syndrome.
• Virilization refers to accompanying additional alterations, such as deepen
ing of the voice, clitoromegaly, increased muscle bulk, and breast atrophy.
• Axillary and pubic hair are sensitive to low levels of androgen.
• Hair on the upper chest, face (scalp region not involved), and back
requires more androgen and represents the pattern seen in males.
• Circulating androgens involved are testosterone, DHEA, DHEAS, and
androstenedione in response to LH and ACTH.
• Measurements of DHEAS as well as a dexamethasone suppression test
helps in separating an adrenal from an ovarian source.
• Polycystic ovarian syndrome is the most common cause of ovarian
androgen excess.
PREGNANCY
Ovum Pickup and Fertilization
In women, the ovum is released from the rupturing follicle into the abdominal
cavity, where it is “picked up” by the fimbria of the oviduct. Failure of ovum pickup
may result in ectopic pregnancy, i.e., the implantation of the blastocyst at any site
other than the interior of the uterus.
Fertilization occurs in the upper end of the oviduct within 8–25 hours after
ovulation. After this, the ovum loses its ability to be fertilized. Sperm retain their
capacity to fertilize an ovum for as long as 72 hours after ejaculation. For about
48 hours around the time of ovulation the cervical mucus is copious and slightly
alkaline. This environment represents a good conduit for the sperm.
Weeks of gestation (gestational age) to estimate the delivery date are commonly
taken from the first day of the last menstrual period.
Sperm are transported from the vagina to the upper ends of the oviduct by
contraction of the female reproductive tract. The swimming motions of the sperm
are important for penetration of the granulosa cell layer (cumulus oophorus) and
membranes surrounding the ovum.
Low sperm counts (<20 million/mL of ejaculate) are associated with reduced
fertility because sperm from ejaculates with low counts often contain many sperm
with poor motility and an abnormal morphology. The first step in infertility
evaluation is semen analysis.
371
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 371 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Implantation
At the time of implantation, which occurs about 5 7 days after fertilization, the
development is at the blastocyst stage. The trophoblastic cells of the fetus now
begin to secrete a peptide hormone, human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). HCG
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
starts 10 days after fertilization.
Fetal hCG possesses a β subunit similar to that of LH, and therefore it has consid
erable LH activity.
Microbiology
The presence of the beta subunit of hCG in the urine can be detected by a variety
of test kits for the detection of pregnancy.
Hormonal Maintenance of the Uterine Endometrium
The production of estrogen and progesterone during pregnancy can be divided into
3 phases:
• Part of the luteal phase before implantation
• Early pregnancy
• Late pregnancy
Preparation for Implantation Pregnancy
implantation
Fetal
pituitary
ACTH
Pituitary LH Placental hCG
Adrenal
Androgen
LDL
Fetal liver
Placenta
Ovary
Luteal Luteal Progesterone Aromatase
cells cells
Progesterone Progesterone Progesterone Estrogen Estradiol
and estrogen and estrogen (estriol) estrone
(estradiol) (estradiol)
Figure FiguXre 11VII5.11St5e.roiSdtseroids DDuurirningg PrePgrneagnncayncy
372
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 372 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 11 | FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
Preparation for implantation (luteal phase)
Pituitary LH stimulates luteal cells to secrete progesterone and some estrogen.
Because the ovaries are the source of the estrogen, it is mainly estradiol.
Implantation to second month
• Within a week or two of fertilization, trophoblastic cells of the placenta
begin secreting hCG. In short, hCG prevents regression of the corpus
luteum, thus allowing it to continue producing estrogens and
progesterone.
• hCG doubles in the early weeks of pregnancy. Because it maintains
secretion of progesterone from the corpus luteum, progesterone is a
sensitive marker of early fetal well being.
• Loss of the corpus luteum during this period terminates the pregnancy.
However, in lieu of the corpus luteum, exogenous progesterone would be a
functional substitute.
Third month to term
• Placenta secretes enough progesterone and estrogen to maintain the
uterus. This is not controlled by hCG. At this time, the ovaries (corpus
luteum) can be removed and pregnancy continues.
• Progesterone secretion of the placenta is limited only by the amount of
precursor (cholesterol) delivered by low density lipoproteins (LDL) to the
placenta. Progesterone maintains uterine quiescence during pregnancy.
• The secretion of estrogen involves both the fetus and the placenta.
• The fetal adrenal gland secretes dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). The
fetal liver then converts DHEA to androstenedione (A) and testosterone.
• The placenta expresses aromatase. This enzyme converts the A and
testosterone from the fetus into estrogens, estriol being the primary one.
Thus, estriol becomes a good marker for fetal well being.
Peripheral Effects of Hormonal Changes
The large amount of estrogen and progesterone secreted by the placenta during
pregnancy stimulates the following important changes within the mother:
• Massive growth of the uterus, especially the myometrium
• Increased growth of all components (glands, stroma, and fat) of the
breasts
373
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 373 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Additional hormonal changes
Increased prolactin secretion by the pituitary in response to elevated estrogens
Secretion of human placental lactogen (hPL), also called human chorionic somato
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
mammotropin (hCS), by the placenta. This markedly increases during the latter
half of the pregnancy.
• hPL (hCS) has considerable amino acid sequence homology with growth
hormone but has very little growth stimulating activity.
Microbiology
• hPL (hCS) has metabolic actions similar to growth hormone; that is, it
increases maternal lipolysis and ketogenesis and decreases maternal
glucose utilization, thereby making maternal energy stores more available
for the fetus.
• During the second trimester pregnancy becomes a hyperinsulinemic state
with peripheral resistance to the metabolic effects of insulin. This reserves
glucose for fetal needs and the mother depends more heavily on fatty acids
as a source of energy. Under these conditions even modest fasting can
cause ketosis.
• These anti insulin actions of hPL (hCS) may also account for the gesta
tional diabetes that develops in some pregnant women.
• hPL (hCS) is secreted in proportion to the size of the placenta and is an
index of placental well being.
100 10 300
80 8 240
(IU/ml) (Im/ml) (ng/ml
PRL =prolactin 60 6 hCG hPL 180
Prog = progesterone hCG hPL PRL PRL
40 4 120
20 2 60
0 (ng/ml) 0 0
200 20
(ng/ml)
Estriol
Estrogens
160 16
Progesterone
120 12
Estradiol
Unconjugated
80 8 Prog Estrone
40 4
0 0
0 10 20 30 40
Gestation (weeks)
Figure FigureX V11II 116. 6.HoHrmoromnoene LevLelesvelsDuringDurPinreggnancyPregnancy
374
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 374 15/10/22 2:22PM
CHAPTER 11 | FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
Maternal Compensatory Changes of Pregnancy
Cardiovascular/renal
Cardiac output increases but peripheral resistance decreases and as a result there is
no hypertension associated with a normal pregnancy (parallel circuit of placenta).
Blood pressure declines in the first trimester and gradually rises toward prepreg
nancy levels thereafter.
GFR increases and renal threshold decreases. Combined with the increased plasma
glucose, glucose often appears in the urine.
Endocrine
The anterior pituitary enlarges by about one third, due to a hyperplasia of the
lactotrophs driven by the rise in estrogen. Postpartum pituitary necrosis
(Sheehan syndrome) is preceded by obstetric hemorrhage. The posterior
pituitary is usually spared. Failure to lactate is the most common clinical sign.
Other manifestations would include the consequences of hypothyroidism and
hypocortisolism.
Estrogen increases the circulating steroid binding globulins and bound hormone
increases but FT4 is normal. Hyperthyroidism increases the risk of preterm
delivery. Hypothyroidism is unusual in pregnancy.
Estrogen increases the synthesis and release of angiotensinogen, which in turn
increases AngII. Estrogens may stimulate renin, but this is controversial.
Changes induced near the end of pregnancy
The pubic symphysis, cervix, and vagina become more distensible. These changes
make passage of the fetus through the birth canal easier. The peptide hormone
relaxin, which is secreted by the placenta, also promotes these changes.
In response to elevated plasma estrogens, oxytocin receptors increase in the
myometrium. Thus, the sensitivity of the uterine myometrium to the excitatory
action of oxytocin is increased.
Parturition
The factors that initiate parturition are not well understood, but the following facts
are known:
• Estrogens and progesterone are high throughout pregnancy. Estrogens
upregulate phospholipase A2 in the amnion as well as oxytocin receptors
in the myometrium.
• Prostaglandins cause contraction of the uterus and are thought to initiate
the labor process. Contraction of the myometrium pushes the fetus
towards the cervix.
375
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 375 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
• Dilation of the cervix stimulates afferent neurons that cause the release of
oxytocin from the posterior pituitary gland. Oxytocin contracts the
myometrium and stimulates local production of prostaglandins. This
contraction is thought to participate in parturition, and contraction of the
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences uterus by oxytocin is thought to play an important role in limiting blood
loss after the fetus is expelled.
• When a fetus dies, toxic products originating from the fetus increase
prostaglandin release in the uterus, thus initiating contractions and a
Microbiology spontaneous abortion (miscarriage). Similarly, administration of prosta
glandins induces abortion.
LACTATION
Mammary Gland Growth and Secretion
Growth of mammary tissue is stimulated by the female sex steroids estrogen and
progesterone. However, for these steroids to stimulate maximum growth, prolac
tin, growth hormone, and cortisol also must be present.
During pregnancy, the high levels of plasma estrogen greatly increase prolactin
secretion, but milk synthesis does not occur because the high level of estrogen
(and progesterone) blocks milk synthesis. At parturition, plasma estrogen
drops, withdrawing the block on milk synthesis. As a result, the number of
prolactin receptors in mammary tissue increases several fold, and milk
synthesis begins.
Maintaining Lactation
Suckling is required to maintain lactation.
376
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 376 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 11 | FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
Hypothalamus
Magnocellular nuclei
• decrease in release of dopamine = increase in prolactin
of hypothalamus • decrease in release of GnRH = decrease in FSH and LH
(synthesizes oxytocin)
Posterior pituitary Anterior pituitary
(stores and
releases oxytocin)
Prolactin
Oxytocin
Milk synthesis
by mammary
alveolar cells
Suckling by the baby
Contraction of the stimulates neural
Afferent myoepithelial basket cells receptors in the nipple
neurons produces milk ejection.
FigureFiguVreII 11 7X. L1a1ctatio7n. Laacntadtionthe Sucklainngd Rtheeflex Suckling Reflex
The suckling of the baby at the mother’s breast stimulates receptors in the mother’s
nipples. Signals from these receptors are transmitted to the hypothalamus and have
the following effects:
• Oxytocin synthesis and secretion are increased. Oxytocin causes the
myoepithelial basket cells that surround the alveoli to contract. Preformed
milk is ejected into the ducts and out the openings of the nipple; that is,
milk ejection is initiated.
• The release of dopamine by the hypothalamus into the hypophyseal portal
vessels is inhibited. This removes a chronic restraint on prolactin secre
tion. Prolactin secretion increases, and milk secretion is stimulated each
time the baby suckles.
• The secretion of GnRH into the hypophyseal portal vessels is inhibited;
secretion of FSH and LH decreases. Thus, follicular growth, estrogen
secretion, ovulation, and menses cease. High prolactin levels also contrib
ute to the amenorrhea.
377
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 377 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VII | ENDOCRINOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
For the suckling stimulus to inhibit GnRH secretion completely, the stimulus must
be prolonged and frequent. Supplementation of the mother’s milk with other fluids
or sources of energy reduces the baby’s suckling and allows gonadotropin secre
tion, follicular growth, and ovulation to occur.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Women who do not wish to breastfeed their children are sometimes administered
large doses of estrogen. The estrogen inhibits lactation (by its inhibitory action of
milk synthesis), even though estrogen promotes increased prolactin secretion.
Microbiology Breastfeeding is a form of contraceptive because it should stop ovulation.
378
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 378 15/10/22 2:22P
PART VIII
GASTROINTESTINAL
PHYSIOLOGY
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 379 15/10/22 2:22P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 380 15/10/22 2:22P
1#
Overview and Motility
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Explain how the gastrointestinal tract is structured
❏ Explain nervous control and endocrine control of the gastrointestinal
system
❏ Explain information related to motility
THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
Structure
Muscularis
Serosa externa
Circular muscle
Gland in
Submucosa submucosa
Muscularis mucosa Submucosal
plexus
Lamina propria
Myenteric
Epithelium plexus
Villus
Longitudinal
muscle
Lymph node
Figure VIII 1 1. Gastrointestinal (GI) Tract
Figure XI 1 1. Gastrointestinal Tract
381
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 381 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VIII | GASTROINTESTINAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Mucosa
• Epithelium: consists of a single layer of specialized cells; some are involved
in secretions and some release hormones
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences • Lamina propria: layer of connective tissue that contains glands, hormone
containing cells, lymph nodes, and capillaries
• Muscularis mucosa: a thin layer of muscle, the contraction of which causes
folding and ridges in the mucosal layers
Microbiology
Submucosa
• Layer of connective tissue that contains glands, large blood vessels, and
lymphatics
• Outermost region has a nerve net called the submucosal (Meissner’s)
plexus; Meissner’s plexus is part of the enteric nervous system and is
involved in secretory activity
Muscularis externa
• Inner layer of circular muscle
• Outer layer of longitudinal muscle
• Myenteric nerve plexus involved in motor activity is between the muscle
layers
NOTE
Serosa
Sympathetic regulation of the splanchnic • Outermost layer of GI tract
circulation does not involve the enteric
• Consists of connective tissue and a layer of epithelial cells
nervous system.
• Within this layer, autonomic nerve fibers run and eventually synapse on
target cells and the enteric nerve plexus
Nervous Control
Residing in the GI tract is a vast neural network called the enteric nervous system
(Meissner’s and myenteric plexuses). Normal GI function is dependent on this
neural network. The enteric nervous system is innervated by the autonomic
nervous systems and serves as the final mediator for virtually all neurally mediated
changes.
Sympathetic
The diagram below illustrates how the synaptic junction at the end of a nerve fiber
secretes norepinephrine (NE), which then induces responses in the gastrointesti
nal (GI) system.
↓ motility
↓ secretions
< NE
↑ constriction of sphincters
An increase in sympathetic activity slows processes.
382
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 382 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 1 | OVERVIEW AND MOTILITY
Parasympathetic
< ACH ↑ motility VIP: vasoactive intestinal peptide,
↑ secretions
released from enteric neurons
< VIP ↓ constriction of sphincters GRP: gastrin releasing peptide; stimulates
the release of gastrin from G cells
↑ gastrin
< GRP G cell
Via the enteric nervous system, an increase in parasympathetic activity promotes
digestive and absorptive processes.
Endocrine Control
Table VIII 1 1. Endocrine Control of GI System
Hormone** Source Stimulus Stomach Motility Pancreas Gallbladder
and Secretion
Secretin S cells lining Acid entering Inhibits Stimulates fluid
duodenum duodenum secretion (HCO3 –)
CCK Cells lining Fat and amino Inhibits emptying Stimulates enzyme 1. Contraction
duodenum acids entering secretion
2. Relaxation
duodenum
sphincter (Oddi)
Gastrin G cells of Stomach Stimulates
stomach distension
Antrum Parasym (GRP)
Peptides
Duodenum Stomach acid
inhibits*
GIP Duodenum Fat, CHO, Inhibits Increases insulin
amino acids
GLP Decreases glucagon
CCK = cholecystokinin; GIP = gastric inhibitory peptide (glucose insulinotropic peptide),
GLP = glucagon like peptide
*Note: In a non–acid producing stomach (e.g., chronic gastritis), the reduced negative
feedback increases circulating gastrin.
**All 4 hormones stimulate insulin release.
MOTILITY NOTE
Anticholinergic medications such as atropine
Characteristics of Smooth Muscle or tricyclic antidepressants slow GI motility.
Electrical activity
• Resting membrane potential −40 to −65 mV. Close to depolarization.
NOTE
• Oscillation of membrane potential is generated by interstitial cells (inter
Nerve gas increases GI and bronchial
stitial cells of Cajal) that act as pacemakers. This is referred to as slow
waves or basic electrical rhythm, and if threshold is reached, it generates secretions.
action potentials.
383
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 383 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VIII | GASTROINTESTINAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
• Action potentials are generated by the opening of slow channels that allow
the entry of both sodium and calcium.
• The duodenum contracts the most often.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Motor activity
• Stretch produces a contractile response.
• Gap junctions create an electrical syncytium within the smooth muscle.
Microbiology
• Slow waves set the maximal frequency of contractions; action potentials
associated with slow waves cause muscular contraction.
• Pacemaker activity from the interstitial cells creates the intrinsic motor
activity.
• Tonic contraction at sphincters act as valves.
Swallowing
Swallowing is a reflex controlled from the brain stem. Efferent input is via the
vagus nerve for all events.
UES — neurogenic
(skeletal muscle)
Primary peristaltic
wave
LES — myogenic
(smooth muscle)
• relaxation by VIP
Receptive
relaxation
Figure FigureXI V1III2.1S2w.allSowwianllgo,wing, ththee PerPiestraislttiacltic WaveWave
Events during swallowing:
• Relaxation of upper esophageal skeletal muscle sphincter (UES)
• Primary peristaltic wave
• Relaxation of lower esophageal smooth muscle sphincter (LES) via VIP,
which relaxes smooth muscle via NO
• Relaxation of proximal stomach (receptive relaxation)
If the primary peristaltic wave is not successful, a secondary peristaltic wave
is initiated by local distension of the esophagus. The secondary wave is not
“conscious.”
384
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 384 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 1 | OVERVIEW AND MOTILITY
Disorders of the Esophagus NOTE
Dysphagia refers to difficulty in swallowing.
Achalasia
• Failure of the LES to relax, resulting in swallowed food being retained in
the esophagus
• Caused by abnormalities in the enteric nerves
• Peristaltic waves are weak
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY
• LES doesn’t maintain tone Barrett esophagus is the term used to
describe alterations in the esophageal
• Acid reflux damages esophageal epithelium
epithelium that accompany GERD.
Diffuse esophageal spasm
• Spasms of esophageal muscle
• Presents with characteristics of a heart attack (e.g., chest pain)
• Barium swallow shows repeated, spontaneous waves of contraction
Gastric Motility
Pyloric sphincter
Duodenum
(relaxed by VIP)
ACh: acetylcholine
Stomach
Pacemaker BER: basic electrical rhythm
Distension BER 3/min
GRP: gastrin releasing peptide
ACh
VIP: vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
GRP Parasympathetic
G
Gastrin
Figure VIII 1 3. Endocrine and Neural Control of the Stomach
Figure XI 1 3. Endocrine and Neural Control of the Stomach
Stimulation
• Acetylcholine released in response to activation of parasympathetics
• Local distension
Inhibition
• Low pH of stomach contents inhibits the release of gastrin.
• Feedback from duodenal release of hormones (CCK, secretin, and GIP)
385
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 385 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VIII | GASTROINTESTINAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Stomach emptying
• Liquids > CHO > protein > fat (> = faster than)
• The pylorus of the stomach acts as a sphincter to control the rate of
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences stomach emptying. A wave of contraction closes the sphincter so that only
a small volume is moved forward into the duodenum. CCK, GIP, and
secretin increase the degree of pyloric constriction and slow stomach
emptying.
Microbiology
Small Intestinal Motility
Rhythmic contractions in adjacent sections create segmentation contractions,
which are mixing movements. Waves of contractions preceded by a relaxation of
the muscle (peristaltic movements) are propulsive.
• Ileocecal sphincter, or valve between the small and large intestine, is
normally closed
• Distension of ileum creates a muscular wave that relaxes the sphincter
• Distension of colon creates a nervous reflex to constrict the sphincter
Colon Motility
Segmentation contractions create bulges (haustrations) along the colon. Mass
movements, which are propulsive, are more prolonged than the peristaltic move
ments of the small intestine.
Migrating Motor Complex
Migrating motor complex (MMC) is a propulsive movement initiated during
fasting. It begins in the stomach and moves undigested material from the stomach
and small intestine into the colon.
During fasting, MMC repeats every 90–120 minutes. When one movement
reaches the distal ileum, a new one starts in the stomach.
• Correlated with high circulating levels of motilin, a hormone of the small
intestine
• Removes undigested material from the stomach and small intestine and
helps reduce bacterial migration from colon into the small intestine
Defecation
Defecation is a reflex involving the central nervous system. A mass movement in
the terminal colon fills the rectum, causing a reflex relaxation of the internal anal
sphincter and a reflex contraction of the external anal sphincter.
• Voluntary relaxation of the external sphincter accompanied with propul
sive contraction of the distal colon leads to complete defecation.
• Lack of a functional innervation of the external sphincter causes involun
tary defecation when the rectum fills.
386
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 386 15/10/22 2:22P
2#
Secretions
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Demonstrate understanding of salivary, gastric, and pancreatic
secretions
❏ Demonstrate understanding of the composition and formation of bile
SECRETIONS
Salivary Secretions
Parotid gland secretions are entirely serous (lack mucin). Submandibular and
sublingual gland secretions are mixed mucus and serous. They are almost entirely
under the control of the parasympathetic system, which promotes secretion.
The initial fluid formation in the acinus is via an indirect chloride pump
(secondary active transport powered by the Na/K ATPase pump), and the electro
lyte composition is isotonic and similar to interstitial fluid.
Duct cells modify the initial acinar secretion.
Parasympathetic
Sympathetic
Cl pump
Na+
Cl–K+
–
HCO3
Figure XI 1 4. SalivarVyIII 2 1.SeScarelitvioanryFigureSecretion
387
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 387 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VIII | GASTROINTESTINAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Composition of salivary secretions
• Low in Na+, Cl–because of reabsorption
• High in K+, HCO3 because of secretion (pH = 8)
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
• Low tonicity: Salivary fluid is hypotonic because of reabsorption
of NaCl and impermeability of ducts to water.
• α amylase (ptyalin): secreted in the active form and begins the
digestion of carbohydrates
Microbiology
• Mucus, glycoprotein
• Immunoglobulins and lysozymes
Gastric Secretions
The epithelial cells that cover the gastric mucosa secrete a highly viscous alkaline
fluid (mucin plus bicarbonate) that protects the stomach lining from the caustic
action of HCl.
• Fluid needs both mucin and bicarbonate to be protective.
• Nonsteroidal anti inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as aspirin decrease
the secretion of the mucin and bicarbonate.
• Surface of the mucosa studded with the openings of the gastric glands
• Except for the upper cardiac region and lower pyloric region whose glands
secrete mainly a mucoid fluid, gastric glands secrete a fluid whose pH can
be initially as low as 1.0.
Secretions of the main cells composing the oxyntic gastric glands
Parietal cells
• HCl
• Intrinsic factor combines with vitamin B12 and is reabsorbed in the distal
ileum. This is the only substance secreted by the stomach that is required
for survival. It is released by the same stimuli that release HCl.
Chief cells
Pepsinogen is converted to pepsin by H+, as illustrated in the diagram below.
H+
Pepsinogen pepsin (proteins to peptides)
• Pepsinogen is initially converted to active pepsin by acid.
• Active pepsin continues the process.
• Pepsin is active only in the acid pH medium of the stomach.
• Pepsin begins the digestion of protein but is not essential for life.
Secrete gastric lipase to begin fat digestion.
388
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 388 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 2 | SECRETIONS
Mucous neck cells
Mucous neck cells secrete the protective mucus, HCO3 combination.
+ ACh
H+ Parietal + Histamine + Stimulates secretion
cell
+ Gastrin – Inhibits secretion
Stomach Distension (+)
+
G
Parasympathetic
GRP (+)
Figure VIII 2 2. Control of Gastric Acid Secretion
Figure XI 1 5. Control of Gastric Acid Secretion
Control of acid secretion
There are 3 natural substances that stimulate parietal cells (figure above):
• Acetylcholine (ACh), acting as a transmitter; release is stimulated by sight/
smell of food and reflexly in response to stomach distension (vagovagal
reflex).
• Locally released histamine; stimulated by Ach and gastrin
• The hormone gastrin; stimulated by release of GRP
As stomach pH falls, somatostatin (SST) is released, which inhibits gastrin and
reduces acid secretion (feedback regulation of acid secretion).
Cellular mechanisms of acid secretion (figure below)
• Within the cell, carbonic anhydrase facilitates the conversion of CO2 into
H+ and HCO3 –.
• The demand for CO2 can be so great following a meal that the parietal
cells extract CO2 from the arterial blood. This makes gastric venous blood
the most basic in the body.
• Hydrogen ions are secreted by a H/K ATPase pump similar to that in the
distal nephron.
• The pumping of H+ raises intracellular HCO3 – and its gradient across the
basal membrane and provides the net force for pumping Cl–into the cell.
• The chloride diffuses through channels across the apical membrane,
creating a negative potential in the stomach lumen.
• Because of the extraction of CO2 and secretion of HCO3 –, the venous
blood leaving the stomach following a meal is alkaline.
389
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 389 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VIII | GASTROINTESTINAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
• Compared with extracellular fluid, gastric secretions are high in H+, K+,
Cl–, but low in Na+.
• The greater the secretion rate, the higher the H+ and the lower the Na+.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences • Vomiting stomach contents produces a metabolic alkalosis and a loss of
body potassium (alkalosis contributes to loss of potassium via effects on
the kidney).
Microbiology
Arterial
H2O + CO2
blood Stomach
CO2
Carbonic
Anhydrase
HCO3 H/K ATPase CHl+––H+
–
HCO3
Venous Cl–K+
blood
alkaline
tide K+
Vital enzymes H/K ATPase
Carbonic anhydrase
FiguFriegure XVIII1I 26.3R.eRguelgautiloatnion ooff PPaarriieettaall CeCllellSecSreectiroention
Pancreatic Secretions
Exocrine tissue is organized into acini and ducts very similar to that of the salivary
glands.
• Cholinergic nerves to the pancreas stimulate the secretion of both the
enzyme and aqueous component.
• Food in the stomach stimulates stretch receptors and, via vagovagal
reflexes, stimulates a small secretory volume.
• Sympathetics inhibit secretion but are a minor influence.
• Most of the control is via secretin and CCK.
Enzymatic components
• Trypsin inhibitor, a protein present in pancreatic secretions, prevents
activation of the proteases within the pancreas.
• In addition to the following groups of enzymes, pancreatic fluid contains
ribonucleases and deoxyribonucleases.
• A diet high in one type of food (protein, CHO, fat) results in the preferen
tial production of enzymes for that particular food.
390
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 390 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 2 | SECRETIONS
Pancreatic amylases are secreted as active enzymes:
• Hydrolyze a 1,4 glucoside linkage of complex carbohydrates, forming
three smaller compounds:
– α Limit dextrins: still a branched polysaccharide
– Maltotriose, a trisaccharide
– Maltose, a disaccharide
• Cannot hydrolyze β linkages of cellulose
Pancreatic lipases are mainly secreted as active enzymes. Glycerol ester lipase
(pancreatic lipase) needs colipase to be effective. Colipase displaces bile salt from
the surface of micelles. This allows pancreatic lipase to attach to the droplet and
digest it, leading to formation of 2 free fatty acids and one monoglyceride (a
2 monoglyceride, i.e., an ester on carbon 2).
Cholesterol esterase (sterol lipase) hydrolyzes cholesterol esters to yield choles
terol and fatty acids. Pancreatic proteases are secreted as inactive zymogens. They
include trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen, and procarboxypeptidase.
Activation sequence. The activation sequences are summarized below.
enterokinase*
trypsinogen trypsin (endopeptidase)
trypsin
chymotrypsinogen chymotrypsin
(endopeptidase)
trypsin
procarboxypeptidase carboxypeptidase
(exopeptidase)
*Enterokinase (also known as enteropeptidase) is an enzyme secreted by the lining
of the small intestine. It is not a brush border enzyme. It functions to activate some
trypsinogen, and the active trypsin generated activates the remaining proteases.
Fluid and electrolyte components
• Aqueous component is secreted by epithelial cells lining the ducts.
• Fluid is isotonic due to the high permeability of the ducts to water and the
concentrations of Na and K are the same as plasma.
• Duct cells secrete chloride into the lumen via the cystic fibrosis transmem
brane conductance regulator (CFTR). This chloride is then removed from
the lumen in exchange for bicarbonate. Thus, bicarbonate secretion is
dependent upon chloride secretion.
• CFTR is activated by cAMP (see below).
• In cystic fibrosis there is a mutation in the gene that encodes this CFTR
channel, resulting in less chloride and a reduced fluid component of
pancreatic secretions. The smaller volume of highly viscous fluid may also
contain few enzymes.
391
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 391 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VIII | GASTROINTESTINAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
CCK
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences (duodenal fat, aa)
+
Parasympathetic
Initial secretion
Microbiology high in HCO3
Secretin
(duodenal acid)
Enzymes HCO3 – and fluid
Figure VIII 2 4. Control of the Exocrine Pancreas
Figure XI 1 7. Control of the Exocrine Pancreas
Control of pancreatic secretions
Most of the regulation is via 2 hormones: secretin and cholecystokinin.
Secretin is released from the duodenum in response to acid entering from the
stomach.
• Action on the pancreas is the release of fluid high in HCO3 –. Secretin is a
peptide hormone that stimulates chloride entry into the lumen from duct
cells. Secretin activates Gs–cAMP, which in turn activates CFTR in ductal
cells.
• This released HCO3 – rich fluid is the main mechanism that neutralizes
stomach acid entering the duodenum.
Cholecystokinin (CCK) is released from the duodenum in response to partially
digested materials (e.g., fat, peptide, and amino acids).
• Action on the pancreas is the release of enzymes (amylases, lipases,
proteases).
Recall Question
Which of the following is a characteristic of GERD?
A. Failure of lower esophageal sphincter to relax
B. Odynophagia
C. Failure of lower esophageal sphincter to maintain its tone
D. Spasms of esophageal muscle
E. Presents with chest pain
Answer: C
392
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 392 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 2 | SECRETIONS
COMPOSITION AND FORMATION OF BILE
LIVER Glycine Primary bile
taurine acid production
form Primary 1. Cholic acid Enterohepatic
Micelles
bile salts 2. Chenodeoxycholic acid circulation
Conjugation
Liver fats
e.g., cholesterol cholesterol
phospholipid
Bilirubin
Glucuronic acid (lipid soluble)
Conjugated
bilirubin Blood
Conjugation
(aqueous soluble) prot. Bilirubin
Contraction
stimulated
O–Fat by CCK
soluble
Secretin 1. Micelles material GALL
–
HCO3 BLADDER
and 2. Bile pigments
fluid conjugated bilirubin Na+ — active
transport
3. Salts and H2O
K+, Cl–, H2O
— follow Na+
CCK relaxes
Active
(95%) transport of
1° or 2° bile salts
Micelles for digestion and absorption lipid
1° bile salts 2° bile salts Distal ileum
Duodenum
Bile pigments To feces
Figure VIII 2 5. Production and Metabolism of Bile
Figure XI 1 8. Production and Metabolism of Bile
Bile salts and micelles
Primary bile acids known as cholic acid and chenodeoxycholic acid are synthe
sized by the liver from cholesterol.
• The lipid soluble bile acids are then conjugated primarily with glycine.
• The conjugated forms are water soluble but contain a lipid soluble segment.
• Because they are ionized at neutral pH, conjugated bile acids exist as salts
of cations (Na+) and are, therefore, called bile salts.
• Bile salts are actively secreted by the liver.
393
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 393 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VIII | GASTROINTESTINAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
• Secondary bile acids are formed by deconjugation and dehydroxylation of
the primary bile salts by intestinal bacteria, forming deoxycholic acid
(from cholic acid) and lithocholic acid (from chenodeoxycholic acid).
• Lithocholic acid has hepatotoxic activity and is excreted.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
• When bile salts become concentrated, they form micelles. These are
water soluble spheres with a lipid soluble interior.
• As such, they provide a vehicle to transport lipid soluble materials in the
Microbiology aqueous medium of the bile fluid and the small intestine.
• Micelles are vital in the digestion, transport, and absorption of lipid solu
ble substances from the duodenum to the distal ileum.
• In the distal ileum, and only in the distal ileum, can the bile salts be
actively reabsorbed and recycled (enterohepatic circulation).
• Lack of active reabsorbing mechanisms (or a distal ileal resection) causes
loss in the stool and a general deficiency in bile salts, as the liver has a
limited capacity to manufacture them. In turn, this can lead to fat
malabsorption.
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY Bile pigments
Increased levels of plasma bilirubin produce A major bile pigment, bilirubin is a lipid soluble metabolite of hemoglobin.
Transported to the liver attached to protein, it is then conjugated and excreted as
jaundice. If severe, bilirubin can accumulate
water soluble glucuronides. These give a golden yellow color to bile.
in the brain, producing profound
neurological disturbances (kernicterus). Stercobilin is produced from metabolism of bilirubin by intestinal bacteria. It
gives a brown color to the stool.
Salts and water
The HCO3 – component is increased by the action of secretin on the liver.
The active pumping of sodium in the gallbladder causes electrolyte and water
reabsorption, which concentrates the bile.
Bile pigments and bile salts are not reabsorbed from the gallbladder.
Phospholipids (mainly lecithin)
Insoluble in water but are solubilized by bile salt micelles
Cholesterol
Present in small amounts. It is insoluble in water and must be solubilized by bile
salt micelles before it can be secreted in the bile.
Control of bile secretion and gallbladder contraction
• Secretin causes secretion of HCO3–and fluid into bile canalicular ducts.
• Secretion of bile salts by hepatocytes is directly proportional to hepatic
portal vein concentration of bile salts.
• CCK causes gallbladder contraction and sphincter of Oddi relaxation.
394
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 394 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 2 | SECRETIONS
Enterohepatic circulation
• The distal ileum has high affinity uptake of bile acids/salt (symport with
Na+).
• These bile acids/salts enter the portal vein and travel to the liver, which in
turn secretes them into the cystic duct, from which they re enter the
duodenum.
• This recycling occurs many times during the digestion of a meal and plays
a significant role in fat digestion.
• The synthesis of bile acids by the liver is directly related to the concentra
tion of bile acids in the portal vein.
Small Intestinal Secretions
The most prominent feature of the small intestine is the villi.
• Surface epithelial cells display microvilli.
• Water and electrolyte reabsorption greatest at the villus tip.
• Water and electrolyte secretion greatest at the bottom in the crypts of
Lieberkuhn.
Na+ Na+
3Na+
ISF
Lumen
Cl–2K+
Na+
2Cl–K+
Cl–K+
Luminal Basolateral
membrane membrane
Figure VIII 2 6. Secretion of Electrolytes by a Crypt Cell of the Small Intestine
Figure XI 1 9. Secretion of Electrolytes by a
Crypt Cell of the Small Intestine
395
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 395 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VIII | GASTROINTESTINAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY Crypt secretion
Cholera toxin binds and activates Gs, • A Na+ K+ 2Cl–transporter in the basolateral membrane facilitates the ion
uptake by secondary active transport.
resulting in very high levels of intracellular
PathologcyAMP. This rise in cAMP BoepheanvsioraSlcliuemncinea/SlociaSlCcile−nces • Na+ entry drives the entry of K+ and Cl–into the cell.
channels, causing a massive secretory • The elevated intracellular Cl–and negative intracellular potential drive the
diarrhea. diffusion of chloride through channels on the apical membrane.
• Luminal Cl–then pulls water, Na+, and other ions into the lumen, creating
Microbiology the isotonic secretion. This is the general scheme of the chloride pump.
• Neurotransmitter secretagogues include VIP and ACh.
• The Cl–channels are opened by increases in cytosolic Ca2+ and/or cAMP.
The cAMP dependent Ca2+ channels are CFTR channels.
396
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 396 15/10/22 2:22P
3#
Digestion and Absorption
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Demonstrate understanding of digestion
❏ Answer questions about digestive enzymes and end products
❏ Demonstrate understanding of absorption
DIGESTION
The figure below summarizes the regional entry of the major digestive enzymes
proceeding from the mouth, stomach, and through the small intestine.
397
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 397 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VIII | GASTROINTESTINAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Triglyceride CHO Protein
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
α Amylase Mouth
Microbiology
Lipase Pepsin Stomach
*Lipase *Trypsin,
*α Amylase Pancreas
Colipase etc.
*Bile micelles Gallbladder
Small
*Sucrase *Peptidases intestine
*Lactase (brush border)
(lactose
intolerant)
2' Monoglycerides Glucose, Galactose, Amino acids (40%)
Fatty acids Fructose Di ,Tripeptides (60%)
*Required for digestion
Figure VIII 3 1. Digestive Processes
Figure XI 1 10. Summary of Digestive Processes
Digestive Enzymes and End Products
Triglycerides
Stomach: Fatty materials are pulverized to decrease particle size and increase
surface area. Although not essential for fat digestion, the stomach does secrete
lipase.
Small intestine: Bile micelles emulsify the fat, and pancreatic lipases digest it.
Micelles and pancreatic lipase are required for triglyceride digestion. The major
end products are 2 monoglycerides and fatty acids.
398
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 398 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 3 | DIGESTION AND ABSORPTION
Carbohydrates
Mouth: Salivary α amylase begins the digestion, and its activity continues in the
stomach until acid penetrates the bolus. However, it is not a required enzyme.
Small intestine: Pancreatic α amylase, a required enzyme for CHO digestion,
continues the process. α amylase hydrolyzes interior bonds to produce oligosac
charides (limited dextrins) and disaccharides.
Brush border enzymes (sucrase isomaltase; maltase; lactase; trehalase) convert
limited dextrans and disaccharides into monosaccharides. These monosaccharides
are then absorbed (late duodenum and early jejunum) via the mechanisms shown
in the figure below.
Proteins
Stomach: Pepsin begins the digestion of protein in the acid medium of the
stomach, but this is not an essential enzyme.
Small intestine: Digestion continues with the pancreatic proteases (trypsin, chymo
trypsin, elastase, and carboxypeptidases A and B), which are essential enzymes.
Protein digestion is completed by the small intestinal brush border enzymes,
dipeptidases, and an aminopeptidase. The main end products are amino acids
(40%) and dipeptides and tripeptides (60%).
Pancreatic enzymes are required for triglyceride, CHO, and protein digestion.
Circulating CCK is almost totally responsible for their secretion following ameal.
ABSORPTION
Carbohydrate and Protein
The figure below illustrates the major transport processes carrying sugars and amino
acids across the luminal and basal membranes of cells lining the small intestine.
Small intestine ISF
Na Galactose
Glucose
Glucose
Galactose
Fructose
Fructose
ATPase
Na
Na
H+ H+
K
Peptides
Di , Tripeptides
Na
Amino acids
Amino acids
aa
Na Amino acids
aa
Figure FiguXrIe 1VII1I1.3 2A.bsAorbpstoiorpntion ofoCfarbCohayrbdorahtyedsrates and Proteinasnd Proteins
399
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 399 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VIII | GASTROINTESTINAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY Carbohydrate
Celiac disease is an immune reaction to • Luminal membrane: Glucose and galactose are actively absorbed (second
gluten (protein found in wheat) that ary active transport linked to sodium) via the sodium glucose linked
transporter 1 (SGLT 1). Fructose is absorbed independently by facilitated
Pathologdyamages intestinal cells;BehtahveioraeSlncdiencer/eSsoucltiaSlcieinsces
diffusion.
diminished absorptive capacity of the small
• Basal membrane: The monosaccharides are extruded from the cell via
intestine.
facilitated diffusion.
Microbiology
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY Protein
Many of the amino acid transporters are • Luminal membrane: amino acids are transported by secondary active
transport linked to sodium. Small peptides uptake powered by a Na+ H+
selective for specific amino acids. Hartnup
antiporter.
disease is a genetic deficiency in the
transporter for tryptophan. • Basal membrane: simple diffusion of amino acids, although it is now
known some protein mediated transport also occurs.
Lipids
The figure below summarizes the digestion and absorption of lipid substances. The
end products of triglyceride digestion, 2 monoglycerides and fatty acids, remain as
lipid soluble substances that are then taken up by the micelles.
Digestive products of fats found in the micelles and absorbed from the intestinal
lumen may include the following:
• Fatty acids (long chain)
• 2 monoglyceride
• Cholesterol
• Lysolecithin
• Vitamins A, D, E, K
• Bile salts, which stabilize the micelles
Micelles diffuse to the brush border of the intestine, and the water soluble exterior
allows them to carry fat soluble products into the cell.
BRIDGE TO BIOCHEMISTRY
In the mucosal cell, triglyceride is resynthesized and forms lipid droplets (chylo
Chylomicrons contain apolipoprotein B 48.
microns). These leave the intestine via the lymphatic circulation (lacteals). They
Once in the systemic circulation,
then enter the bloodstream via the thoracic duct.
chylomicrons are converted to VLDL (very
low density lipoprotein), and they The more water soluble short chain fatty acids can be absorbed by simple diffu
incorporate apoproteins CII and E from HDL sion directly into the bloodstream. The bile salts are actively reabsorbed in the
distal ileum.
(high density lipoprotein).
400
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 400 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 3 | DIGESTION AND ABSORPTION
Small intestine
Tri G
Bile micelles
(emulsify)
Pancreatic
lipase
2 Monoglycerides
Fatty acids
(long chain)
Mucosal cell
2 Monogly,
2 Monogly, Diffusion
fatty acids Long chain Tri G
fatty acids
Phospholipids
Cholesterol
Lysolecithin
Fat soluble Lymph
vitamins (lacteal)
Chylomicrons
Vit. A, D, E, K
Short
chain
fatty Blood
acids
Bile Active
Blood
salts Transport
Distal ileum
Figure FigurXeI 1VIII12.3 3.AbAsobrspotiropntion ofofLipLidipsids
Electrolytes
The net transport of electrolytes along the length of the small and large intestine is
summarized in the figure below.
Duodenum
• Hypertonic fluid enters this region, and following the movement of some
water into the lumen, the fluid becomes and remains isotonic (see crypt
secretion above).
• The absorption of most divalent ions and water soluble vitamins begins
here and continues through the small intestine.
401
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 401 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PART VIII | GASTROINTESTINAL PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
• Ingested iron and calcium tend to form insoluble salts. The acid environ
ment of the stomach redissolves these salts, which facilitates their absorp
tion in the small intestine. Iron and calcium absorption is diminished in
individuals with a deficient stomach acid secretion.
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
• Calcium absorption is enhanced by the presence of calbindin in intestinal
cells, and calcitriol (active vitamin D) induces the synthesis of this protein.
• Intestinal cells express the protein ferritin, which facilitates iron absorption.
Microbiology
Jejunum
• Overall, there is a net reabsorption of water and electrolytes.
• The cellular processes involved are almost identical to those
described in the renal physiology section for the cells lining the nephron
proximal tubule.
Ileum
• Net reabsorption of water, sodium, chloride, and potassium continues, but
there begins a net secretion of bicarbonate.
• It is in the distal ileum, and only in the distal ileum, where the reabsorp
tion of bile salts and intrinsic factor with vitamin B12 takes place.
Colon
• The colon does not have digestive enzymes or the protein transporters to
absorb the products of carbohydrate and protein digestion.
• Also, because bile salts are reabsorbed in the distal ileum, very few
lipid soluble substances are absorbed in the colon.
• There is a net reabsorption of water and sodium chloride, but there are
limitations.
• Most of the water and electrolytes must be reabsorbed in the small
intestine, or the colon becomes overwhelmed.
• Most of the water and electrolytes are absorbed in the ascending and
transverse colon; thereafter, the colon has mainly a storage function.
• The colon is a target for aldosterone, where it increases sodium and water
reabsorption and potassium secretion.
• Because there is a net secretion of bicarbonate and potassium, diarrhea
usually produces a metabolic acidosis and hypokalemia. It commonly
presents as hyperchloremic, nonanion gap metabolic acidosis, as described
in the acid base section.
402
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 402 15/10/22 2:22P
CHAPTER 3 | DIGESTION AND ABSORPTION
Intestinal lumen Interstitial fluid
Duodenum
H2O
isotonic
(Na, H2O, etc.)
Ca2+, Fe2+ (upper small intestine)
Jejunum
Na+,
H2COl–K+, Similar to proximal
tubular cell of kidney
–
HCO3
Ileum
Na+,
H2COl–K+,
–
HCO3
Cl–Bile salts
Intrinsic factor - vit. B12
Colon
Smallest
Na+,Cl–H2O
absorption
HCO3 –
here
Cl–K+
Figure VIII 3 4. Transport of Electrolytes
Figure XI 1 13. Transport of Electrolytes
Diarrhea
Except for the infant where it can be hypotonic, diarrhea is a loss of isotonic fluid
that is high in bicarbonate and potassium.
403
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 403 15/10/22 2:22P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 404 15/10/22 2:22P
Index
A diagnosis, 240, 243 cell types, 27
graphical representation, 244 changes in conductance, 31
A–a (alveolar–arterial) gradient, 180
metabolic acidosis with, 242 conduction velocity, 32
A band, 55, 56
mixed metabolic and, 241, 243 defined, 27
ABGs (arterial blood gases)
respiratory alkalosis neuronal, 27–32
acid base disturbances, 235–236, 242–243
bicarbonate, 237, 240 properties, 31–32
normal values, 237
cause, 247 refractory periods, 31
Absolute refractory period, 31, 64
compensation, 238, 241 sarcolemma, 59–60
Absorption, 399–403
defined, 236 skeletal muscle, 59–60
carbohydrate and protein, 399–400
diagnosis, 240, 243 mechanical response to single, 60–61
diarrhea, 403
graphical representation, 244 summation and recruitment, 61–62
electrolytes, 401–403
metabolic acidosis with, 241 subthreshold stimulus, 29
forces, 12
mixed metabolic and, 242 threshold stimulus, 29, 30
lipids, 400–401
types, 236–238 voltage gated ion channels, 28–29
microcirculation, 11
Acid base regulation, 235–248 Activation gate (m gate), 28
Acclimatization, 172
buffering systems, 235 Active tension curve, 68, 69
ACE (angiotensin converting enzyme), 277
Acidosis, 231 Active transport, 203
inhibitors, 202
diagnosis, 236 Acute renal failure, 232–233
Acetylcholine (ACh), 32
metabolic Addison’s disease, 281–282
Acetylcholinesterase (AChE), 33
bicarbonate, 237, 240 Adenomas
Achalasia, 385
cause, 247 pituitary, 259, 279
Acid base disturbances, 231
compensation, 238, 241 toxic thyroid, 337
arterial blood gases, 235–236, 242–243
defined, 236 ADH. See Antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
bicarbonate, 237, 240
diagnosis, 240 Adiponectin, 311
cause, 246–248
graphical representation, 244–245 Adrenal androgens, 357
compensation, 236, 238–239, 241–242,
mixed respiratory and, 241, 243 synthesis, 270
245–246
plasma anion gap, 240 Adrenal cortex, 269–291
formulation of diagnosis, 235–236, 240–243
with respiratory alkalosis, 241 ACTH
graphical representation, 244–246
renal tubular, 229 control of secretion, 274–275
metabolic acidosis
respiratory ectopic, 280, 283
bicarbonate, 237, 240
bicarbonate, 237, 240 hypercortisolism, 280–281, 283
cause, 247
cause, 246–247 hypocortisolism, 281–283
compensation, 238, 241
compensation, 238, 241 aldosterone
defined, 236
defined, 236 control of secretion, 276–279
diagnosis, 240
diagnosis, 240, 243 deficiency, 281
graphical representation, 244–245
graphical representation, 244 physiologic actions, 275–276
mixed respiratory and, 241, 243
metabolic acidosis with, 242 renin angiotensin aldosterone system,
plasma anion gap, 240
mixed metabolic and, 241, 243 277–279
with respiratory alkalosis, 241
Acid secretion, control, 389–390 specific actions, 276
metabolic alkalosis, 237, 240
ACMV (assisted control mode synthesis pathway, 271
bicarbonate, 237, 240
ventilation), 142 cortisol
cause, 247
acromegaly, 259 control of secretion, 274–275
compensation, 238, 242
Acromegaly, 350 deficiency, 281, 285–291
defined, 236
ACTH. See Adrenocorticotropic hormone metabolic actions, 273
diagnosis, 240
(ACTH) metabolism, 270
graphical representation, 244–245
Actin permissive actions, 273
mixed respiratory and, 242
skeletal muscle, 57, 58 stress, 272
with respiratory acidosis, 242
smooth muscle, 64 synthesis, 270, 272
plasma anion gap, 239–240
Action potential dehydriepiandrosterone
respiratory acidosis
cardiac, 38–42 synthesis pathway, 270
bicarbonate, 237, 240
nodal cells, 41–42 enzyme deficiencies, 285–291
cause, 246–247
non nodal cells, 38–40 functional regions, 269
compensation, 238, 241
vs. skeletal muscle, 63–64 glucocorticoids
defined, 236
405
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 405 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Adrenal cortex (continued) graphical representation, 244–245 class II, 42
disorders, 279–283 metabolic acidosis with, 241 class III, 40
physiologic actions, 272–273 mixed metabolic and, 242 class IV, 42
mineralocorticoids Alpha cells, 298 Antidiuretic hormone (ADH), 261–263
disorders, 283–284 Altitude action, 263
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
principal cells, 226–227 hypoxemia, 181 aquaporins, 227
steroid hormones respiratory stress, 172–173 cardiovascular regulation, 95
synthetic pathways, 270–271 Alveolar air equation, 159–160 effects of alcohol and weightlessness, 263
Adrenal hyperplasia, congenital, 285–291 Alveolar–arterial (A–a) gradient, 180 fluid distribution, 10
consequences, 287–290 Alveolar–blood gas transfer, 160–161 functions, 261
Microbiology
11β hydroxylase deficiency, 287–289 Alveolar dead space, 136 hyponatremia, 266–267
17α hydroxylase deficiency, 289–290 ventilation perfusion mismatch, 178 natriuretic peptide and, 264
21β hydroxylase deficiency, 285–287 Alveolar membrane, gas partial pressure regulation of ECF volume and osmolarity,
Adrenal insufficiency difference, 161 263–264
primary, 281–282 Alveolar oxygen uptake, 108 secretion
secondary, 282 Alveolar PCO2, factors affecting, 158–159 pathophysiologic changes, 264–266
Adrenal medulla, 269, 293–295 Alveolar PO2, factors affecting, 159–160 regulation, 261–262
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) Alveolar pressure, 139–141 syndrome of inappropriate, 265–266
control of secretion, 274–275 Alveolar pressure of carbon dioxide. See PaCO2 synthesis and release, 263
ectopic, 280, 283 (alveolar pressure of carbon dioxide) Antiport, 204
hypercortisolism, 280–281, 283 Alveolar ventilation, 136–137 Aorta, 76
hypocortisolism, 281–283 and alveolar PCO2, 158–159 fetal circulation, 115, 116
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) neural regulation, 170–172 Aortic aneurysm, 81–82
stimulation test, rapid, 282 Ambient air, partial pressure of gas, 157 Aortic auscultation point, 121
Adulthood, male reproductive system, 358 Amenorrhea, 370 Aortic bodies, 171
Adult respiratory distress syndrome Amino acids, absorption, 400 Aortic insufficiency regurgitation, 125, 127
(ARDS), 147 α Amylase, 398, 399 Aortic stenosis, 125, 126
Afterload, 67 Anabolic hormones, 300 Aortic valve
cardiac output, 100 Anatomic dead space, 134–136 closure, 119, 120
pumping action, 112 Androgens, 357 opening, 119, 120
systolic performance of ventricle, 86 adrenal, 357 Apneustic breathing, 172
Age related hormonal changes, males, 357–359 synthesis, 270, 272 Appetite, hormones, 311
Aging adult, male reproductive system, 358 estrogens and formation of, 369 Aquaporins, 227
Airway radius, 148 menstrual cycle, 364 ARBs (angiotensin II receptor blockers), 202
Airway resistance, 148–149 Anemia, 166–168, 171 ARDS (adult respiratory distress
Alcohol, effect on ADH secretion, 263 Aneurysm syndrome), 147
Aldosterone, 10 aortic, 81–82 Arginine vasopressin (AVP). See
control of secretion, 276–279 arterial, 81–82 Antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
deficiency, 281 dissecting, 82 Aromatase, 357
physiologic actions, 275–276 Angiotensin, renin angiotensin control of testes, 356
renin angiotensin aldosterone system, aldosterone system, 277–279 placenta, 373
277–279 Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE), 277 Arrhythmias, 48–51
specific actions, 276 Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) Arterial aneurysm, 81–82
synthesis pathway, 271 inhibitors, 202 Arterial baroreceptors, 95–96
Alkalosis, 231 Angiotensin I (Ang I), 277, 278 Arterial blood gases (ABGs)
“contraction,” 222 Angiotensin II (Ang II) acid base disturbances, 235–236, 242–243
diagnosis, 236 cardiovascular regulation, 95 normal values, 237
metabolic, 222 glomerular filtration, 201–202 Arterial PCO2, 237
bicarbonate, 237, 240 renin angiotensin aldosterone system, cerebral circulation, 113
cause, 247 277, 278 Arterial pressure, systemic, short term
compensation, 238, 242 Angiotensin II (Ang II) receptor blockers regulation, 93–97
defined, 236 (ARBs), 202 Arterial system, exercise, 117
diagnosis, 240 Angiotensinogen, 277, 278 Arteries, 76
graphical representation, 244–245 Anion gap, plasma, 239–240 systemic, characteristics, 103–106
mixed respiratory and, 242 ANP (atrial natriuretic peptide), 264 Arterioles, 76
with respiratory acidosis, 242 Anterior pituitary diastolic pressure, 104
respiratory disorders, 258–259 mean arterial pressure, 105
bicarbonate, 237, 240 effect of hypothalamic hormones, 258 Ascending aorta, fetal circulation, 115, 116
cause, 247 pregnancy, 375 Ascending limb, loop of Henle, 224
compensation, 238, 241 structure and function, 257–259 Assisted control mode ventilation
defined, 236 Antiarrhythmic agents (ACMV), 142
diagnosis, 240, 243 class I, 40 Atelectasis, 146–147
406
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 406 15/10/22 2:22P
INDEX
Atmospheric pressure (Patm) and alveolar pressure, resistance, and, 76–77 Calcium (Ca2+)
PO2, 159 pulmonary circuit, 114–115 absorption, 313
Atrial fibrillation, 50 regional differences, 176 body distribution, 313–314
Atrial flutter, 50 regulation, 109–111 bone remodeling, 315–317
Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), 264 extrinsic, 110–111 bound vs. free, 314
Atrial septal defect, left to right shunt, 185 intrinsic (auto ), 109–110 calcitonin, 318
Atrioventricular (AV) node cells resting vs. exercising muscle, 111 cytosolic
action potentials, 41–42 to various organs, 111–115 regulation, 59–60
automaticity, 37 cerebral circulation, 113 removal in myocardial cells, 63
conduction, 37 coronary circulation, 111–112 disorders, 320–322
Auscultation points, 121 cutaneous circulation, 113–114 distal tubule, 226
Autoimmune thyroid disease, 337, 338 pulmonary circuit, 114–115 hormonal control, 313–325
Automaticity, 37 renal and splanchnic circulation, 113, metabolic bone disorders, 324–325
Autoregulation 114 parathyroid hormone, 317–318
blood flow, 109–110 velocity, 79 phosphate and, 314–315
nephron hemodynamics, 194 Blood pressure, 76–77 plasma, 314
Autoregulatory range, 110 long term regulation, 277–279 and PTH, 318
AV node cells. See Atrioventricular (AV) Blood urea nitrogen (BUN), normal resting membrane potential, 25
node cells values, 5 Calcium (Ca2+) channel blockers, 42
AVP (arginine vasopressin). See Antidiuretic Blood vessels Calcium (Ca2+) current, inward, 41
hormone (ADH) compliance, 81 Calcium (Ca2+) homeostasis, vitamin D
awave, venous pulse, 122 wall tension, 81–82 (calcitriol), 318–320
Axon, 33, 34 Blood volume, 15 Calcium sensing receptor (CaSR), 224
Axon hillock, 33, 34 mean systemic filling pressure, 98 Calmodulin (CAM), 65
BMP (basic metabolic profile/panel), 4–5 Canagliflozin, 221
B
BNP (brain natriuretic peptide), 264 Capillaries, 76
Baroreceptor(s) Body compartments, 3 Capillary membranes, 3, 15
arterial, 95–96 graphical representation, 5–8 Carbamino compounds, 168
cardiopulmonary mechanoreceptors, 96–97 volume measurement, 14–15 Carbohydrate(s) (CHO)
Baroreceptor reflex, 95 Body water, total, 3 absorption, 399, 400
Baroreflexes, 95–96 Bone disorders, metabolic, 324–325 digestion, 398, 399
Barrett esophagus, 384 Bone remodeling, 315–317 Carbohydrate (CHO) metabolism
Bartter syndrome, 224 Bone resorption, 317 cortisol, 273
Basal membrane, 400 Botulinum toxin, 36 insulin deficiency, 308
Base electrical rhythm, 383 Bowditch effect, 86 insulin effects, 300
Basic metabolic profile/panel (BMP), 4–5 Bowman’s capsule, 190 thyroid hormones, 335
The bends, 173 fluid entering, 199 Carbon dioxide bicarbonate (CO2 −HCO3 −)
Beta blockers, 42 protein or oncotic pressure, 197 buffer system, 235
Beta cells, 298, 303 Bowman’s space Carbon dioxide (CO2), dissolved, 168
Bicarbonate (HCO3 −) hydrostatic pressure, 197 Carbon dioxide (CO2) alveolar pressure.
acid base disturbances, 237, 240 protein or oncotic pressure, 197 See PaCO2 (alveolar pressure of
carbon dioxide transport, 168–169 Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), 264 carbon dioxide)
normal values, 5, 237 Breastfeeding, 376–378 Carbon dioxide (CO2) content, 169
production, 276 Breathing Carbon dioxide (CO2) partial pressure.
proximal tubule, 221 abnormal patterns, 172 See PCO2
Bile apneustic, 172 Carbon dioxide (CO2) transport, 168–169
composition and formation, 393–395 Cheyne Stokes, 172 Carbonic acid, 235
control of secretion, 394 Brush border enzymes, 399 Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, 221
Bile acids, 393–394 Buffering systems, 235 Carbon monoxide (CO), 162
Bile pigments, 394 Buffy coat, 78 effects on oxygen transport, 167–168
Bile salts, 393–394 BUN (blood urea nitrogen), normal poisoning, 167–168
Bilirubin, 394 values, 5 Carboxypeptidase, 391
Biogenic amines, 251, 252 Bundle of Kent, 50 Cardiac action potentials, 38–42
Bladder, micturition, 192–193 Cardiac arrhythmias, 48–51
C
Blood Cardiac cycle, normal, 119–124
carrying capacity, 164 Ca2+. See Calcium (Ca2+) heart sounds, 119, 120–121
viscosity, 78 Caisson’s disease, 173 venous pulse, 122–124
Blood flow Calcitonin, 318 Cardiac index, 108
cardiovascular stress (exercise), 117–118 Calcitriol Cardiac muscle
fetal circulation, 115–116 actions, 319–320 skeletal vs., 63–64
Fick principle, 107–109 calcium homeostasis, 318–320 systolic and diastolic dysfunction,
laminar vs. turbulent, 79–80 sources and synthesis, 318–319 90–92
407
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 407 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Cardiac muscle (continued) Chemical mechanical transduction, 58 systolic pressure, 104
systolic performance of ventricle, 83–86 Chemical specificity, protein mediated vessel, 81
ventricular function curves, 87–89 transport, 204 Conductance (g), 19
Cardiac output (CO), 75, 97 Chemoreceptors Conduction, cardiac tissue, 37–38
determinants, 98–102 central, 170–171 Conduction pathway, cardiac tissue, 38
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Fick principle, 107 peripheral, 171 Conduction velocity, action potential, 32
long term regulation, 277–279 Chenodeoxycholic acid, 393 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia, 285–291
mean arterial pressure, 105 Chest wall recoil, 138 consequences, 287–290
pregnancy, 375 Cheyne Stokes breathing, 172 11β hydroxylase deficiency, 287–289
pulmonary response, 115 Chief cells, secretions, 388 17α hydroxylase deficiency, 289–290
Microbiology
pumping action, 112 Childhood, male reproductive system, 358 21β hydroxylase deficiency, 285–287
steady state, 98, 100 Chloride (Cl–) Conn’s syndrome, 283
and venous return, 97–98, 100–101 normal values, 5 Continuous positive airway pressure
Cardiac output/venous return (CO/VR) resting membrane potential, 24, 25 (CPAP), 143
curves, 100–101 CHO. See Carbohydrate(s) (CHO) Contractility
Cardiac tissue, properties, 37–38 Cholecystokinin (CCK), 383, 390, 392 cardiac output, 99
Cardiomyopathy, 91–92 Cholera toxin, 396 increased, 125
Cardiopulmonary mechanoreceptors, 96–97 Cholesterol, bile, 394 indices, 85–86
Cardiovascular (CV) changes, ventilation, Cholesterol esterase, 391 pumping action, 112
142 Cholic acid, 393 systolic performance of ventricle, 85–86
Cardiovascular (CV) effects, thyroid Cholinergic transmission, 32–33 systolic pressure, 104
hormones, 335 Chronic renal failure, 233–234 Contraction, cardiac tissue, 38
Cardiovascular (CV) regulation, 93–106 Chvostek’s sign, 322 “Contraction alkalosis,” 222
characteristics of systemic arteries, 103–106 Chylomicrons, 400 Coronary circulation, 111–112
determinants of cardiac output, 98–102 Chymotrypsin, 391 exercise, 118
effects of gravity, 102–103 Chymotrypsinogen, 391 flow patterns, 111–112
short term regulation of systemic Circulation Corpus luteum, 367
arterial pressure, 93–97 cerebral, 113 Cortical nephrons, 189
venous return, 97–98 coronary, 111–112 Corticosterone, synthesis, 271, 272
Cardiovascular (CV) stress, 117–118 cutaneous, 113–114 Corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH),
Cardiovascular (CV) system, 75–76 fetal, 115–116 258, 274
cardiac output, 75 pulmonary, 114–115 Cortisol
hemodynamics, 76–80 renal and splanchnic, 113, 114 control of secretion, 274–275
pregnancy, 375 Circulatory system, 75 deficiency, 281, 285–291
structure function relationships of Cisternae, terminal, 56, 59 twentyfour24 hour urine free, 251, 252,
systemic circuit, 76 Cl–(chloride) 254, 270, 279
vessel compliance, 81 normal values, 5 metabolic actions, 273
wall tension, 81–82 resting membrane potential, 24, 25 metabolism, 270
Carotid bodies, 171 Clearance, 207–208 permissive actions, 273
Carrier competition, protein mediated estimate of glomerular filtration rate, stress, 272
transport, 204 213–214 synthesis, 270, 272
Carrying capacity, blood, 164 free water, 216 Cotransport, 204
CaSR (calcium sensing receptor), 224 sodium and urea, 216–217 Countercurrent, loop of Henle, 223
Catecholamines Clearance curves, characteristic Countertransport, 204
control of nodal excitability, 42 substances, 214–216 CPAP (continuous positive airway
half life, 293 Clostridium perfringens, 173 pressure), 143
metabolic actions, 294 CO. See Carbon monoxide (CO); Cardiac C peptide, 298, 299, 303
permissive actions of cortisol, 273 output (CO) Craniopharyngioma, 258
CCK (cholecystokinin), 383, 390, 392 CO2. See Carbon dioxide (CO2) Creatinine (Cr)
CD (collecting duct), 189, 190 Colipase, 398 clearance curve, 214, 215
regional transport, 226–228 Collecting duct (CD), 189, 190 glomerular filtration rate, 213–214
CDI (central diabetes insipidus), 255, regional transport, 226–228 normal values, 5
264–265 Colon Cretinism, 340–341
Celiac disease, 400 electrolyte transport, 402, 403 CRH (corticotropin releasing hormone),
Cell membranes, 3, 15 motility, 386 258, 274
Central chemoreceptors, 170–171 Coma, hyperosmolar, 309 Cross bridge interactions, 58
Central respiratory centers, 171–172 Compensation, acid base disturbances, systolic performance of ventricle, 83
Central venous pressure (CVP), 84 236, 238–239, 241–242, 245 Cross sectional area (CSA), velocity of
Cerebral circulation, 113 Complete heart block, 49 blood flow, 79
exercise, 118 Compliance Crypt cells, 395–396
CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane lung, 144–148 Cryptorchidism, 359
conductance regulator), 391 pulse pressure, 104–105 Crypts of Lieberkuhn, 395–396
408
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 408 15/10/22 2:22P
INDEX
CSA (cross sectional area), velocity of type 1, 307–310 “Effective” osmole, 4
blood flow, 79 type 2, 307, 310 Ejaculation, 360
Cumulus oophorus, 371 Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), 309 Ejection fraction (EF), 85, 89
Cushing disease, 259, 279, 283 Diaphragm, 137 Ejection phase, 120
Cushing syndrome, 255, 279, 281 Diarrhea, 403 Electrical activity, smooth muscle, 383
Cutaneous circulation, 113–114 Diastolic blood pressure, factors affecting, Electrical synapses, 34
exercise, 118 104 Electrocardiogram (EKG, ECG), 43–51
CV. See Cardiovascular (CV) entries Diastolic dysfunction, 90–92 arrhythmias/alterations, 48–51
CVP (central venous pressure), 84 Diffuse esophageal spasm, 385 normal pattern, 43–44
cwave, venous pulse, 122 Diffusing capacity of lung (DLCO), 161–162 reading, 45–48
Cystic fibrosis, 391 Diffusion standard conventions, 44
Cystic fibrosis transmembrane facilitated, 203 Electrocardiology, 43–51
conductance regulator (CFTR), 391 Fick law, 160–161 Electrochemical gradient, 19
Cytosolic calcium simple, 203 Electrolytes
regulation, 59–60 Diffusion constant, 161 proximal tubule, 221
removal in myocardial cells, 63 Diffusion impairment, hypoxemia, transport, 401–403
181–182 Emission, 359
D Diffusion limited situation, 161, 162 Em (membrane potential), 19
Dalton’s law, 157 Diffusion rate, factors affecting, 160–161 End diastolic volume (EDV), 89, 90
Darrow Yannet diagram, 5 Digestion, 397–399 Endocrine pancreas, 297–312
Davenport plot, 244–246 Digestive enzymes, 397–399 diabetes mellitus, 306–309
Dead space, 134–136 Dihydropyridine (DHP), 59 glucagon
alveolar, 136 Dihydrotestosterone, 357 actions, 304
normal male development, 358 control of secretion, 305–306
anatomic, 134–136
Dilated cardiomyopathy, 91 synthesis, 298
physiologic, 136
Dissecting aneurysm, 82 insulin
ventilation perfusion mismatch, 178
Decompression sickness, 173 Dissolved carbon dioxide. See PCO2 actions, 299–302
Defecation, 386 Dissolved oxygen. See PO2 control of secretion, 303
Dehydration, 266 Distal renal tubular acidosis, 229 synthesis, 298, 299
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) Distal tubule, 189, 190 islets of Langerhans hormones, 297–298
pregnancy, 373 regional transport, 225–226, 231 other hormones involved in energy
synthesis, 270 Diuretics balance and appetite, 311
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) sulfate, loop, 223, 224 pancreatic endocrine secreting tumors,
270 potassium sparing, 226 310
thiazide, 225 Endocrine system
Deiodination, thyroid hormone secretion,
DKA (diabetic ketoacidosis), 309 control of gastrointestinal tract, 383
332
DLCO (diffusing capacity of lung), disorders, 254–255
Delta cells, 298
161–162 primary, 254
Demyelinating diseases, 32
DM. See Diabetes mellitus (DM) secondary, 254
Dendrites, 33, 34
Dopamine, 258 general aspects, 251–255
Denosumab, 324
11 Deoxycorticosterone synthesis, 271 Driving force, 19 hormones, 251–254
Depolarization, 22 Ductus arteriosus pregnancy, 375
Descending aorta, fetal circulation, 115, fetal circulation, 115, 116 Endometrium, hormonal maintenance,
116 patent, left to right shunt, 185 372–373
Descending limb, loop of Henle, 224 Ductus venosus, fetal circulation, 115, 116 Endopeptidase, 391
Detrusor muscle, micturition, 192, 193 Duodenum, electrolyte transport, 401–403 Endorphins, 274
Dexamethasone, high dose, 279 Dwarfism, 346 End plate potential (EPP), 33
Dexamethasone suppression test, 1 mg Dynamic airway compression, 151 End systolic volume (ESV), 89
Dysphagia, 385 Energy balance, hormones, 311
overnight, 279
Energy requirements, proximal tubule, 222
DHEA (dehydroepiandrosterone)
E Enteric nervous system, 382–383
pregnancy, 373
synthesis, 270 ECF. See Extracellular fluid (ECF) Enterohepatic circulation, 393, 395
DHEA (dehydroepiandrosterone) sulfate, ECG. See Electrocardiogram (EKG, ECG) Enterokinase, 391
270 Ectopic ACTH syndrome, 280, 283 Enteropeptidase, 391
DHP (dihydropyridine), 59 Ectopic pregnancy, 371 Epinephrine (EPI), 293
Diabetes insipidus (DI), 264–266 Edema, 13–14 cardiovascular regulation, 95
central, 255, 264–265 defined, 13 metabolic actions, 293–294
nephrogenic, 228, 265 non pitting, 13 stress, 272
Diabetes mellitus (DM), 306–309 peripheral, 13–14 EPP (end plate potential), 33
EPSP (excitatory postsynaptic potential),
diabetic ketoacidosis, 309 pitting, 13
34
hypoglycemia, 309 pulmonary, 14
Equilibrium potential, 19, 22–25
metabolic syndrome (syndrome X), 307 EDV (end diastolic volume), 89, 90
409
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 409 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Erection, 359 Extracellular solutes, 4–5 Follicle stimulating hormone (FSH)
Ergocalciferol, 318 Extrinsic regulation, blood flow, 110–111 control of testes, 354, 355
ERV (expiratory reserve volume), 133, 134 menstrual cycle, 361–368
Esophageal spasm, diffuse, 385 F Follicular phase, menstrual cycle, 361–364,
Patho E l s o o g p y hagus BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences Facilitated diffusion, 203 366, 368
Barrett, 384 Facilitated transport, 203 Foramen ovale, fetal circulation, 115, 116
disorders, 385 Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia Forced expiratory flow volume loop, 155
Essential hypertension, 125 (FHH), 224 Forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV1),
Estradiol Fasting, migrating motor complex, 386 149–150
control of testes, 356 Forced vital capacity (FVC), 149–150
Microbiology Fat metabolism
17β Estradiol, 369 Force velocity curve, 70
cortisol, 273
menstrual cycle, 361–364, 368 insulin deficiency, 308 Fractional concentration of oxygen (FiO2)
metabolism and excretion, 368–370 insulin effects, 300–301 and alveolar PO2, 159–160
pregnancy, 372, 374 Frank Starling curves, 87–89
thyroid hormones, 335
Estriol, 369 Frank Starling mechanism, 84
Feedback relationships, thyroid hormone
pregnancy, 374 secretion, 336 Free circulating hormones, 252–253
Estrogens Female reproductive system, 361–378 Free water clearance, 216
and androgen formation, 369 lactation, 376–378 FSH (follicle stimulating hormone)
bone remodeling, 316 menstrual cycle, 361–368 control of testes, 354, 355
defined, 369 menstrual irregularities, 370–371 menstrual cycle, 361–368
menstrual cycle, 361–365, 368 pregnancy, 371–376 Functional residual capacity (FRC), 133, 134
parturition, 375 sex steroid metabolism and excretion, lung force relationships at, 139
pregnancy, 372–374 368–370 Funny current (If), nodal action potential,
Estrone, 369 41, 42
Fertilization, 371
pregnancy, 374 Fusion, thyroid hormone secretion, 332
Fetal circulation, 115–116
ESV (end systolic volume), 89 FVC (forced vital capacity), 149–150
Fetal life, male reproductive system, 358
Euvolemia, clinical, 267
FEV1 (forced expiratory volume in 1sec),
Excitable tissue, 19–20 149–150 G
Excitation contraction coupling, 55–66 FF (filtration fraction), 199–200 Gallbladder contraction, 394
altering force in skeletal muscle, 60–62 factors affecting, 200 Gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA)
comparison of striated muscles, 63–64 FHH (familial hypocalciuric receptors, 34
regulation of cytosolic calcium, 59–60 hypercalcemia), 224 Gas gangrene, 173
skeletal muscle structure function Fick law of diffusion, 160–161 Gastric acid secretion, 388
relationships, 55–58 Fick principle, 107–109 control, 389–390
smooth muscle, 64–66
Filling phase Gastric inhibitory peptide (GIP), 383
Excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP),
cardiac cycle, 120 Gastric motility, 385–386
34
micturition, 192 Gastric secretions, 388–390
Excretion
Filtered load, 191 Gastrin, 383
filtered load and, 206–207
and excretion, 206–207 Gastrinomas, 310
nephron, 191–192
Filtering membrane, 198 Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), 385
potassium, 230 Filtration Gastrointestinal (GI) blood flow, exercise, 118
rate, 191 microcirculation, 11–12 Gastrointestinal (GI) motility, 383–386
Exercise nephron, 191, 192 colon, 386
blood flow to skeletal muscles, 111 Filtration coefficient, 12 defecation, 386
cardiac output, 99 Filtration fraction (FF), 199–200 disorders of esophagus, 385
pressure volume loops, 125 factors affecting, 200 gastric, 385–386
pulmonary circuit, 115, 117 Filtration rate, 191 migrating motor complex, 386
regional circulations, 117–118 FiO2 (fractional concentration of oxygen) small intestine, 386
systemic circuit, 117
and alveolar PO2, 159–160 smooth muscle characteristics, 383–384
ventilation perfusion relationships, 179
First degree heart block, 48 swallowing, 384
Exocrine pancreas, control, 392
Flow volume loops, 154–155 Gastrointestinal (GI) secretions, 387–396
Exopeptidase, 391 Fluid distribution, 3–11 bile, 393–395
Expiration aldosterone, 10 gastric, 388–390
cardiovascular changes, 142 anti diuretic hormone, 10 pancreatic, 390–392
lung mechanics, 140, 141 extracellular solutes, 4–5 salivary, 387–388
muscles, 137 graphical representation, 5–9 small intestinal, 395–396
Expiratory center, 171–172 negative feedback regulation, 10 Gastrointestinal (GI) tract
Expiratory reserve volume (ERV), 133, 134 osmolar gap, 5 endocrine control, 383
External sphincter, micturition, 193 osmosis, 4 nervous control, 382–383
Extracellular fluid (ECF), 3
renin, 10 structure, 381–382
Extracellular fluid (ECF) volume, 6
total body water, 3 GBS (Guillain Barre syndrome), 32
regulation, 263–264
Fluid loss, isotonic, 8 g (conductance), 19
410
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 410 15/10/22 2:22P
INDEX
GERD (gastroesophageal reflux disease), 385 postnatal, 345 High pressure environment, respiratory
Gestational age, 371 puberty, 349 stress, 173
GFR. See Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) Growth hormone (GH), 254 Hirsutism, 371
GH. See Growth hormone (GH) control of secretion, 348–349 H2O. See Water (H2O)
Ghrelin, 311 excessive secretion (acromegaly), 350 Hormone(s), 251–254
GI. See Gastrointestinal (GI) entries physiologic actions, 346–348 activity, 253
GIP (gastric inhibitory peptide, glucose prepubertal deficiency, 346 resistance, 253
insulinotropic peptide), 383 stress, 272 anabolic, 300
Gitelman syndrome, 225 thyroid hormones, 335 hypothalamic, 257–258
Glomerular capillaries, hydrostatic Growth hormone–releasing hormone lipid vs. water soluble, 251–252
pressure, 197 (GHRH), 258 measurement of levels, 254
Glomerular filtration, 196–202 Guillain Barre syndrome (GBS), 32 posterior pituitary, 261–263
angiotensin II, 201–202 protein bound vs. free circulating,
filtering membrane, 198 H 252–253
filtration fraction, 199–200 specificity, 253
H+. See Hydrogen (H+)
factors affecting, 200 Hartnup’s disease, 400 steroid, 251, 252
fluid entering Bowman’s capsule, 199 Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, 254, 340 synthetic pathways, 270–271
materials filtered, 198–199 Hb. See Hemoglobin (Hb) thyroid (See Thyroid hormones)
net filtration pressure, 197–198 H band, 55, 56 Hormone receptors, 253–254
sympathetic nervous system, 200–201 hCG (human chorionic gonadotropin), HPG (hypothalamic pituitary gonadal)
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR), 196 372–374 axis, males, 353–357
clearance as estimator, 213–214 HCO3 −. See Bicarbonate (HCO3 −) hPL (human placental lactogen), 374
pregnancy, 375 hCS (human chorionic HR. See Heart rate (HR)
Glomerular hemodynamics, 195–196 Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG),
somatomammotropin), 374
Glomerulotubular balance, 220 372–374
Heart, electrical activity, 37–51
Glomerulus(i), 189 Human chorionic somatomammotropin
arrhythmias/ECG alterations, 48–51
GLP (glucagon like peptide), 383 cardiac action potentials, 38–42 (hCS), 374
Glucagon control of nodal excitability, 42–43 Human placental lactogen (hPL), 374
actions, 304 electrocardiology, 43–48 Hydrogen adenosine triphosphatase (H+−
control of secretion, 305–306 properties of cardiac tissue, 37–38 ATPase), intercalated cells, 227
permissive actions of cortisol, 273 Heart block, 48–49 Hydrogen/carbon dioxide (H+/CO2)
stress, 272 first degree, 48 receptors, 171
synthesis, 298 second degree, 49 Hydrogen (H+), secretion, 276
Glucagon like peptide (GLP), 383 third degree (complete), 49 Hydrostatic pressure, 11, 12
Glucagonomas, 310 Bowman’s space, 197
Heart failure, 125
Glucocorticoids glomerular capillaries, 197
Heart rate (HR)
bone remodeling, 316 17α Hydroxylase (17α OH) deficiency,
cardiac output, 99
disorders, 279–283 289–290
ECG, 45–46
physiologic actions, 272–273 11β Hydroxylase (11β OH) deficiency,
pumping action, 112
Glucose 287–289
Heart rhythm, ECG, 45–46
clearance curve, 214, 215 Heart sounds, 119, 120–121 21β Hydroxylase (21β OH) deficiency,
control of insulin secretion, 303 Hematocrit, 78 285–287
counterregulation, 306 Hemodynamics, 76–80 17 Hydroxyprogesterone, 271
normal values, 5 laminar vs. turbulent flow, 79–80 Hyperaldosteronism
peripheral uptake, 299 nephron, 194–196 with hypertension, 283–284
proximal tubule, 221 pressure, flow, resistance, 76–78 with hypotension, 284
tubular reabsorption, 208–209, 221 series vs. parallel circuits, 80 Hyperbaric environment, 173
Glucose insulinotropic peptide (GIP), 383 nephron, 195–196 Hypercalcemia, 320–321
Glycine receptors, 34 differential diagnosis and treatment, 321
systemic circulation, 93–95
Goiter, 343 ECG changes, 51
velocity, 79
toxic multinodular, 337 familial hypocalciuric, 224
Hemoglobin (Hb)
Gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) concentration effects, 166–167 of primary hyperparathyroidism,
control of testes, 354 oxygen content, 164–165 320–321
hypothalamic–anterior pituitary axis, Hemoglobin (Hb) content and oxygen related causes, 321
257–258 content, 166–167 Hypercortisolism, 279–281, 283
lactation, 377, 378 Hemoglobin oxygen (Hb O2) dissociation Hyperfunction, endocrine system, 255
menstrual cycle, 362 curves, 165–166 Hyperglycemia, glucagon secretion, 305
Granulosa cells, 361–363 Hemorrhage, pulmonary response, 115 Hyperkalemia, 23, 28
Graves’ disease, 337, 338, 341–342 h gate (inactivation gate), 28 consequences, 231
Gravity, cardiovascular regulation, 102–103 ECG changes, 51
High altitude
Growth, 345–351 promoters, 231
hypoxemia, 181
intrauterine, 345 Hyperosmolar coma, 309
respiratory stress, 172–173
411
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 411 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Hyperparathyroidism intrapulmonary shunt, 183–184 Intraalveolar pressure, 139, 140
primary, hypercalcemia of, 320–321 ventilation perfusion mismatch, Intracellular fluid (ICF), 3
secondary 182–183 Intracellular volume, 6
renal failure and, 322 Hypoxic vasoconstriction, 179 Intracranial pressure, 113
vitamin D deficiency and, 323 H zone, 55, 56 Intrapleural pressure (IPP)
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Hyperpolarization, 22 expiration, 140–142
hyperprolactinemia, 259 I inspiration, 139, 141, 142
Hypertension Iband, 55, 56 lung recoil, 138
essential, 125 ICF (intracellular fluid), 3 regional differences, 175, 176
hyperaldosteronism with, 283–284 Intrapulmonary shunt, hypoxemia, 183–184
Microbiology IC (inspiratory capacity), 133, 134
Hyperthyroidism, primary, 338, 341–342 Intrarenal renal failure, 233
If(funny current), nodal action potential,
Hypertonic fluid, net loss, 8 Intrauterine growth, 345
41, 42
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 92 Intravenous fluids, distribution, 16
IGFs. See Insulin like growth factors
Hyperventilation, 159, 160 Intrinsic factor, 388
(IGFs)
Hypervolemia, 267 Intrinsic regulation, blood flow, 109–110
IK1 (inward K+ rectifying) channels, 38
Hypoaldosterone states, 229 Ileocecal sphincter, 386 Inulin
Hypocalcemia, 321–322 Ileum, electrolyte transport, 402, 403 clearance curve, 214, 215
additional causes, 322 Implantation, 372 nephron tubule concentration, 223
ECG changes, 51 preparation, 373 Inward calcium (Ca2+) current, 41
of primary hypoparathyroidism, Inactivation gate (h gate), 28 Inward potassium (K+) rectifying (IK1)
321–322 Incidentaloma, pituitary, 350 channels, 38
Hypocortisolism, 281–283 Incretin, 303 Inward sodium (Na+) current, 41
Hypofunction, endocrine system, 255 Infant respiratory distress syndrome, 147 Iodide transport, 329–330
Hypogastric nerve, micturition, 193 Iodination, 330
Inferior vena cava, fetal circulation, 115,
Hypoglycemia Iodine deficiency, 339
116
diabetes mellitus, 309 Iodine intake, thyroidal response to low,
Inhibin(s), 357
factitious, 307, 310 Inhibin B 339
glucagon secretion, 305 control of testes, 354, 356 Iodine uptake, 329–330
Hypogonadism, male, 360 menstrual cycle, 363 Ion channels, 20–22
Hypokalemia, 23 Inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP), action potential, 28–29
consequences, 232 34 ligand gated, 20, 22
ECG changes, 51 Inotropic state, systolic performance of synaptic transmission, 32, 33
promoters, 232 ventricle, 85 ungated (leak), 20, 21
Hypomagnesemia, 322 Inspiration voltage and ligand gated, 21–22
Hyponatremia, 266–267 voltage gated, 20, 21
cardiovascular changes, 142
Hypoparathyroidism IPP. See Intrapleural pressure (IPP)
lung mechanics at end, 139, 140
hypocalcemia of primary, 321–322 IPSP (inhibitory postsynaptic potential), 34
lung mechanics before, 138–139
pseudo ,322 IRV (inspiratory reserve volume), 133, 134
lung mechanics during, 139–141
vitamin D excess and secondary, 323 ISF (interstitial fluid), 3
muscles of, 137
Hypopituitarism, 258–259 Islets of Langerhans hormones, 297–298
Inspiratory capacity (IC), 133, 134
Hypotension, hyperaldosteronism with, Inspiratory center, 171–172 Isometric contraction, 67
284 Inspiratory reserve volume (IRV), 133, 134 maximal, 69
Hypothalamic–anterior pituitary axis Inspired air, partial pressure of gas, Isotonic contraction, 67
disorders, 258–259 157–158 Isotonic fluid
structure and function, 257–259 Insulin loss, 8
Hypothalamic hormones, 257–258 actions, 299–302 net gain, 8
effect on anterior pituitary, 258 liver, 306 Isovolumetric contraction, 120
Hypothalamic pituitary gonadal (HPG) metabolic, 300–301 Isovolumetric relaxation, 120
axis, males, 353–357 Ivabradine, 42
control of secretion, 303
Hypothalmic hypophyseal portal system,
effects on potassium, 301
257 J
synthesis, 298, 299
Hypothyroidism Insulin like growth factors (IGFs) Jaundice, 394
pituitary, 338 intrauterine growth, 345 Jejunum, electrolyte transport, 402, 403
postnatal growth, 345 production and release, 347 Jpoint, 43
primary, 338, 340–341 specific properties, 348 Jugular pulse, 121–123
Hypoventilation, 159, 160 Insulinomas, 310 Juxtaglomerular apparatus, aldosterone
hypoxemia, 180–181 Insulin receptor, 299 secretion, 276–277
Hypovolemia, 267 Insulin resistance, pregnancy, 374 Juxtamedullary nephrons, 189, 223
Hypoxemia, 180–184 Intercalated cells, 227–228, 275
diffusion impairment, 181–182 Internal sphincter, micturition, 192, 193 K
high altitude, 181
Interstitial fluid (ISF), 3 K+. See Potassium (K+)
hypoventilation, 180–181
Intestinal villi, 395 Kallmann’s syndrome, 360
412
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 412 15/10/22 2:22P
INDEX
Kernicterus, 394 Lung mechanics, 137–141 new, 369
Ketoacidosis, diabetic, 309 end of inspiration, 139, 140 ovulation, 361, 363–365
Kidney expiration, 140 Menstrual irregularities, 370–371
functional organization, 189–190 forces acting on lung system, 138 Menstruation, 361, 362, 366, 367
functions, 189 before inspiration, 138 Metabolic acidosis
during inspiration, 139, 140 bicarbonate, 237, 240
L muscles of respiration, 137 cause, 247
Lactase, 398 Lung recoil, 138, 146–147 compensation, 238, 241
Lactation, 376–378 Lung system, forces acting on, 138 defined, 236
Lung volumes, 133–134 diagnosis, 240
Lambert Eaton syndrome, 36
mechanical effect, 149 graphical representation, 244–245
Lamina propria, 381, 382
Luteal phase mixed respiratory and, 241, 243
Laminar flow, 79–80
menstrual cycle, 361, 362, 364, 366–367 plasma anion gap, 240
LaPlace relationship, 81
preparation for implantation, 373 with respiratory alkalosis, 241
Laron dwarfism, 346
Luteinizing hormone (LH) Metabolic actions
Laron syndrome, 346
Latrotoxin, 36 age related changes, 357, 358 cortisol, 273
Leak ion channel, 20, 21 control of testes, 354, 355 epinephrine, 293–294
Lecithin, bile, 394 menstrual cycle, 362–368 insulin, 300–301
Left atrium, fetal circulation, 115, 116 pregnancy, 372 Metabolic alkalosis, 222
Left to right shunts, 184–186 Luteinizing hormone (LH) surge, 365–367 bicarbonate, 237, 240
Left ventricle, fetal circulation, 115, 116 LVEDP (left ventricular end diastolic cause, 247
Left ventricular end diastolic pressure pressure), 83, 87 compensation, 238, 242
(LVEDP), 83, 87 LVEDV (left ventricular end diastolic defined, 236
volume), 83, 84 diagnosis, 240
Left ventricular end diastolic volume
Lymphatics, 12–13 graphical representation, 244–245
(LVEDV), 83, 84
mixed respiratory and, 242
Length tension curves, skeletal and cardiac
muscle, 68–69, 84 M with respiratory acidosis, 242
Leptin, 311 Male reproductive system, 353–361 Metabolic bone disorders, 324–325
LES (lower esophageal sphincter), 384 age related hormonal changes, 357–359 Metabolic effects, insulin deficiency,
Leydig cells, 354–356 erection, emission, and ejaculation, 308–309
LH. See Luteinizing hormone (LH) 359–360 Metabolic mechanism, autoregulation of
Liddle syndrome, 226 hypothalamic pituitary gonadal axis, blood flow, 109
Ligand gated ion channel, 20, 22 353–357 Metabolic rate
synaptic transmission, 32, 33 Mammary gland, 376 and alveolar PCO2, 159
thyroid hormones, 334
Lipase, 398 Mass balance, 206–207
Metabolic syndrome, 307
Lipid absorption, 400–401 Maturation, thyroid hormones, 335
Metabolites, proximal tubule, 221
Lipid hormones, 251–252 Maximum force, 70
Metanephrines, 293
Lipid metabolism Maximum velocity (Vmax), 70
Methyl testosterone, 357
cortisol, 273 Mean arterial pressure (MAP), 78, 94–95
Metyrapone testing, 280
insulin deficiency, 308 factors affecting, 103, 104–105
insulin effects, 300–301 gravity, 102–103 m gate (activation gate), 28
thyroid hormones, 335 Mean electrical axis (MEA), 46 Micelles, 393–394, 398, 400
β Lipotropin, 274, 275 Mean systemic filling pressure (Psf), 98 Microadenomas, pituitary, 259
Lithocholic acid, 394 cardiac output, 101 Microcirculation, 11–13
Liver Mechanically altered states, pressure Micturition reflex, 192–193
glucagon actions, 304 volume loops, 125 MIF (Mullerian inhibiting factor), 358
insulin actions, 306 Mechanoreceptors, cardiopulmonary, 96–97 Migrating motor complex (MMC), 386
Load and velocity, 70 Medullary centers, 171–172 Mineralocorticoids
disorders, 283–284
Long QT syndrome, 40 Meissner’s plexus, 381, 382
principal cells, 226–227
Loop diuretics, 223, 224 α Melanocyte stimulating hormone
Loop of Henle, 189, 190 (α MSH), 274, 275 Minute ventilation, 136
regional transport, 223–225 β Melanocyte stimulating hormone Mitral auscultation point, 121
Lower esophageal sphincter (LES), 384 (β MSH), 274, 275 Mitral insufficiency regurgitation, 129
Luminal membrane, absorption, 400 Membrane potential (Em), 19 Mitral stenosis, 128
Lung MEN (multiple endocrine neoplasia), 255 Mitral valve
diffusing capacity, 161–162 Menses, 361, 362, 366, 367 closure, 119, 120
ventilation/perfusion differences, 175–179 Menstrual cycle, 361–368 opening, 119, 120
“west zones,” 175 follicular (proliferative, preovulatory) MLCK (myosin light chain kinase), 65, 66
Lung capacities, 133–134 phase, 361–364, 366, 368 MLC (myosin light chain) phosphorylase,
65, 66
Lung compliance, 144–148 luteal phase, 361, 362, 364, 366–367
M line, 56
components of lung recoil, 146–147 menses, 361, 362, 366, 367
MMC (migrating motor complex), 386
respiratory distress syndrome, 147–148 monitoring, 369
413
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 413 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Mobitz type Iheart block, 49 Nernst equation, 22 Osmole, “effective,” 4
Mobitz type II heart block, 49 Net filtration pressure, 197–198 Osmoreceptors, 261–263
Motility, gastrointestinal. See Net force, 19 Osmoregulation, 261–263
Gastrointestinal (GI) motility Net transport, 207 Osmosis, 4
Motor activity, smooth muscle, 384 Neural regulation Osmotic pressure, 11, 12
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Motor neurons, 35 alveolar ventilation, 170–172 Osteoblasts, 315, 316
Mouth, digestion, 398, 399 gastrointestinal tract, 382–383 Osteoclasts, 315, 316
α MSH (α melanocyte stimulating Neuromuscular junction (NMJ), 32–33 Osteomalacia, 325
hormone), 274, 275 pathologies, 36 Osteoporosis, 324
β MSH (β melanocyte stimulating Neuronal excitability/conduction Osteoprotegerin (OPG), 315, 316
Microbiology
hormone), 274, 275 decreased, 36 Outward potassium (K+) current, 41
MS (multiple sclerosis), 32 increased, 36 Ovarian 17α OH deficiency, 290
Mucosa, 381, 382 Neurons, synapses between, 33–34 Ovulation, 361, 363–365
Mucous neck cells, 389 Nicotinic receptor blockers, 36 Ovum, pickup and fertilization, 371
Mullerian duct, 358 Nicotinic synapses, 32–34 Oxygenation, coronary circulation, 112
Mullerian inhibiting factor (MIF), 358 NIS (sodium/iodide symporter), 329 Oxygen consumption (VO2), Fick
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN), 255 Nitric oxide (NO), cardiovascular principle, 107, 108
Multiple sclerosis (MS), 32 regulation, 95 Oxygen hemoglobin (O2 Hb)
Muscle fibers, 55 Nitrogen, high pressure environments, 173 dissociation curves, 165–166
Muscle mass, age related hormonal N methyl D aspartic acid (NMDA) Oxygen (O2)
changes in males, 359 receptor, 21–22, 34 dissolved, 163–164
Muscularis externa, 381, 382 NMJ (neuromuscular junction), 32–33 high pressure environments, 173
Muscularis mucosa, 381, 382 pathologies, 36 Oxygen (O2) content
Myasthenia gravis, 36 Nodal cells of hemoglobin, 164–165
Myelination, 32 action potential, 41–42 hemoglobin concentration and, 166–167
Myelin sheath, 34 automaticity, 37 units, 163
Myenteric plexus, 381, 382 conduction, 37 Oxygen (O2) delivery, Fick principle, 109
Myocardial cells, removal of cytosolic Nodal excitability, control, 42–43 Oxygen (O2) partial pressure. See PO2
calcium, 63 NO (nitric oxide), cardiovascular Oxygen (O2) transport, 163–168
Myocytes regulation, 95 carbon monoxide effects, 167–168
action potentials, 39–40 Non N methyl D aspartic acid (non NMDA) dissolved oxygen, 163–164
contraction, 38 receptor, 34 hemoglobin concentration effects,
Myofibril, ultrastructure, 55–56 Non nodal cells 166–167
Myogenic mechanism, autoregulation of action potential, 38–40 hemoglobin O2 content, 164–165
blood flow, 110 resting membrane potential, 39 oxygen hemoglobin dissociation curves,
Myogenic responses, nephron hemodynamics, Non pitting edema, 13 165–166
194 Norepinephrine (NE), 293 oxyhemoglobin, 164
Myosin cardiovascular regulation, 95 units of oxygen content, 163
skeletal muscle, 57, 58 control of nodal excitability, 42 Oxyhemoglobin, 164
smooth muscle, 64 Oxytocin
Myosin adenosine triphosphatase (myosin O lactation, 377
ATPase), 60 parturition, 376
O2. See Oxygen (O2)
Myosin filament, 56 OAT (organic anion transporter), 211 pregnancy, 375
Myosin light chain kinase (MLCK), 65, 66 Obstructive pulmonary disease, 150, 152–154
Myosin light chain (MLC) 17α OH (17α hydroxylase) deficiency, P
phosphorylase, 65, 66 289–290 P50, 166–167
11β OH (11β hydroxylase) deficiency, Pacemaker action potential, 41–42
N
287–289 PaCO2 (alveolar pressure of carbon
Na+. See Sodium (Na+) 21β OH (21β hydroxylase) deficiency, dioxide)
Natriuresis, 264 285–287 acid base disturbances, 242
Natriuretic peptides, 264 Oncotic pressure, 11, 12 and alveolar PO2, 160
NE. See Norepinephrine (NE) Bowman’s space, 197 PAG (plasma anion gap), 239–240
Negative feedback regulation, 10 plasma, 197 p aminohippuric (PAH) acid
Nephritic syndrome, 198 OPG (osteoprotegerin), 315, 316 clearance curve, 214, 215–216
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, 228, 265 Organic acids/bases, transport, 211–212 tubular secretion, 209–211
Nephron(s) Organic anion transporter (OAT), 211 Pancreas
cortical, 189 Orthostatic intolerance, 103 endocrine, 297–312
function, 191–192 Osmolality, 4 actions of glucagon, 304
hemodynamics, 194–196 Osmolar gap, 5 actions of insulin, 299–302
juxtamedullary, 189, 223 Osmolarity, 4 control of glucagon secretion, 305–306
structure, 189–190 changes in body hydration, 9 control of insulin secretion, 303
Nephrotic syndrome, 198 regulation, 263–264 diabetes mellitus, 306–309
414
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 414 15/10/22 2:22P
INDEX
islets of Langerhans hormones, pH hyponatremia, 266–267
297–298 acid base disturbances, 238 pathophysiologic changes in ADH
other hormones involved in energy arterial blood, 237 secretion, 264–266
balance and appetite, 311 Phenylethanolamine N methyltransferase regulation of ECF volume and
pancreatic endocrine secreting tu (PNMT), 293 osmolarity, 263–264
mors, 310 Pheochromocytomas, 295 Postganglionic neurons, 35
exocrine, control, 392 Phosphate (PO–4) Postnatal growth, 345
Pancreatic amylases, 391 absorption, 313 Postrenal renal failure, 233
Pancreatic endocrine secreting tumors, body distribution, 313–314 Postsynaptic membrane, 32
310 bone remodeling, 315–317 Postsynaptic potential
Pancreatic lipases, 391 calcium and, 314–315 excitatory, 34
Pancreatic proteases, 391, 398, 399 disorders, 322–324 inhibitory, 34
Pancreatic secretions, 390–392 hormonal control, 313–325 Potassium (K+)
Parallel circuits, 80 metabolic bone disorders, 324–325 and aldosterone, 279
Parasympathetic nervous system, 35 Phospholipids, bile, 394 insulin deficiency, 308
control of nodal excitability, 43 Physical conditioning, blood flow, 118 insulin effects, 301
GI tract, 383 Physiologic dead space, 136 normal values, 5
Parathyroid hormone (PTH), 317–318 Pinocytosis, thyroid hormone secretion, resting membrane potential, 23
actions, 317 332 secretion and excretion, 230, 276
bone remodeling, 316 Pitting edema, 13 Potassium (K+) balance, 230–232
plasma calcium and, 318 Pituitary Potassium (K+) channels
regulation of secretion, 318 anterior ungated, 38
Parathyroid hormone–related peptide disorders, 258–259 voltage gated, 29
(PTHrP), 317 effect of hypothalamic hormones, Potassium (K+) current, outward, 41
Paraventricular nucleus (PVN), 262, 263 258 Potassium (K+) homeostasis, disorders,
Parietal cell secretions, 388 structure and function, 257–259 230–232
regulation, 389–390 ovulation, 364 Potassium (K+) sparing diuretics,
Parotid gland secretions, 387 posterior, 261–267 226
Partial pressure of carbon dioxide. See hormones, 261–263 “Power stroke,” 57
PCO2 hyponatremia, 266–267 Prader Willi syndrome, 311
Partial pressure of gas pathophysiologic changes in ADH Preganglionic neurons, 35
in ambient air, 157 secretion, 264–266 Pregnancy, 371–376
in inspired air, 157–158 regulation of ECF volume and osmo ectopic, 371
Partial pressure of oxygen. See PO2 larity, 263–264 hormonal maintenance of uterine
Parturition, 375–376 Pituitary adenomas, 259, 280 endometrium, 372–373
Passive tension curve, 68 Pituitary incidentaloma, 350 implantation, 372
Patent ductus, left to right shunt, 185 Placenta, 372, 373 maternal compensatory changes,
Patm (atmospheric pressure) and alveolar fetal circulation, 115, 116 375–376
PO2, 159 Plasma, oncotic pressure, 197 ovum pickup and fertilization, 371
PCO2, 168 Plasma analysis, hormone levels, 254 peripheral effects of hormonal changes,
arterial, 237 Plasma anion gap (PAG), 239–240 373–374
cerebral circulation, 113 Plasma volume (PV), 3, 15 Preload, 67–69
factors affecting alveolar, 158–159 Pneumothorax, 144 cardiac output, 100
inspired air, 158 PNMT (phenylethanolamine pumping action, 112
PCO2 gradient, 161 Nmethyltransferase), 293 systolic performance of ventricle,
PCWP (pulmonary capillary wedge PO2, 163–164 83–84, 88
pressure), 84 ambient air, 157, 158 Preovulatory follicle, 367
PEEP (positive end expiratory pressure), factors affecting alveolar, 159–160 Preovulatory phase, menstrual cycle,
143 inspired air, 157, 158 361–364, 366, 368
Pelvic nerve, micturition, 193 PO 4. See Phosphate (PO–4) Prepubertal growth hormone deficiency,
Pepsin, 388, 398, 399 PO2 gradient, 161 346
Pepsinogen, 388 Poiseuille equation, 76 Prerenal renal failure, 232
Peptidases, 398 Polycystic ovarian syndrome, 370–371 Pressure gradients, 76–77
Peptide hormones, 251, 252 Polycythemia, 166–168 circulatory system, 98
Perfusion limited situation, 161 Polydipsia, primary, 266 Pressure overload, 90
Peripheral chemoreceptors, 171 PO2 receptors, 171 Pressure volume loops, 124–125
Peripheral edema, 13–14 Portal vein, fetal circulation, 116 Pressure work, 112
Peripheral nervous system, 35 Positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP), Presynaptic membrane, 32
Peristalsis, 384, 385–386 143 Primary transport, 204–205
Permissive action, hormone receptors, 253 Positive pressure ventilation, 142–143 Principal cells, 226–227, 275
Pesticides, 36 Posterior pituitary, 261–267 PR interval, 43, 46
PFT. See Pulmonary function testing (PFT) hormones, 261–263 Procarboxypeptidase, 391
415
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 415 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Progesterone Purkinje cells free water, 216
menstrual cycle, 362, 364, 368 action potentials, 39–40 sodium and urea, 216–217
metabolism and excretion, 368–370 automaticity, 37 Renal corpuscle, 191, 277
parturition, 375 conduction, 38 Renal cortex, 189, 190
pregnancy, 372–374 PVN (paraventricular nucleus), 262, 263 Renal failure, 232–234
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Prolactin PV (plasma volume), 3, 15 and secondary hyperparathyroidism, 322
lactation, 377 P wave, 43 Renal handling of important solutes, 212
pregnancy, 374, 376 Pyloric sphincter, 385 Renal medulla, 189, 190
Proliferative phase, menstrual cycle, 361–364, Renal plasma flow (RPF), 210
366, 368 Q Renal processes, 191–192
Microbiology
Pro opiomelanocortin, 274 quantification of, 206–207
QRS complex, 43, 44
Prostaglandins, parturition, 376 Renal system, 189–193
QRS deflection, 47–48
Protein functional organization of kidney,
QT interval, 43, 44
absorption, 399, 400 189–190
Quadrant method, ECG, 47–48
digestion, 398, 399 function of nephron, 191–192
Protein bound hormones, 252–253 R functions of kidney, 189
Protein mediated transport, 204–206 insulin deficiency, 308
RAAS. See Renin angiotensinaldosterone
Protein metabolism micturition reflex, 192–193
system (RAAS)
cortisol, 273 pregnancy, 375
Radial traction, lung volume, 149
insulin deficiency, 308 Renal tubular acidosis, 229
RANK L (receptor activator of nuclear
insulin effects, 300 Renin, 10
kappa B ligand), bone remodeling,
Protein pressure, Bowman’s space, 197 Renin angiotensin aldosterone system
315, 316
Proteolysis, thyroid hormone secretion, 332 (RAAS), 10
RAP. See Right atrial pressure (RAP)
Proximal renal tubular acidosis, 229 long term regulation of blood pressure
Rapid ACTH stimulation test, 282
Proximal tubule (PT), 189, 190 and cardiac output, 277–279
Rapture of the deep, 173
regional transport, 219–223 pregnancy, 375
RDS (respiratory distress syndrome), 147–148
Pseudohypoparathyroidism, 322 Reproductive changes, puberty, 349
Reabsorption
Psf (mean systemic filling pressure), 98 Reproductive system
bicarbonate, 221
cardiac output, 101 female, 361–378
glucose, 208–209
PTH. See Parathyroid hormone (PTH) lactation, 376–378
metabolites, 221
PTM (transmural pressure gradient), 138, menstrual cycle, 361–368
nephron, 191, 192
139, 149 menstrual irregularities, 370–371
rate, 191
PT (proximal tubule), 189, 190 pregnancy, 371–376
sodium, 220
regional transport, 219–223 sex steroid metabolism and excretion,
urate (uric acid), 222
Puberty, 349 368–370
water and electrolytes, 221
male reproductive system, 358 male, 353–361
Receptor activator of nuclear kappa B
Pudendal nerve, micturition, 193 age related hormonal changes,
ligand (RANK L), bone remodeling,
Pulmonary artery, fetal circulation, 115, 116 357–359
315, 316
Pulmonary capillary blood flow, 158 erection, emission, and ejaculation,
Recruitment, 61, 62
Pulmonary capillary gases, 158 359–360
Red muscle, 71
Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure hypothalamic pituitary gonadal axis,
5α Reductase, 355
(PCWP), 84 353–357
Refractory periods, 31, 64
Pulmonary circuit, 75, 114–115 RER (respiratory exchange ratio), 159
Regional circulations, exercise, 117–118
characteristics, 114–115 Residual volume (RV), 133, 134
Regional transport, 219–233
exercise, 115, 117 Resistance, 76–78
collecting duct, 226–228
hemorrhage, 115 cardiac output, 101
disorders of potassium homeostasis,
Pulmonary edema, 14 Respiration, muscles, 137
230–232
Pulmonary function testing (PFT), 149–155 Respiratory acidosis
distal tubule, 225–226, 231
defined, 133 bicarbonate, 237, 240
loop of Henle, 223–225
flow volume loops, 154–155 cause, 246–247
proximal tubule, 219–223
obstructive vs. restrictive patterns, 152–153 compensation, 238, 241
renal failure, 232–234
physiology, 150–151 defined, 236
renal tubular acidosis, 229
vital capacity, 149–150 diagnosis, 240, 243
Regurgitant valve, 126
Pulmonary response graphical representation, 244
aortic, 127
exercise, 115 metabolic acidosis with, 242
mitral, 129
hemorrhage, 115 metabolic and, 241
Relative refractory period, 31, 64
Pulmonary shunt, hypoxemia, 183–184 Respiratory alkalosis
Relaxin, pregnancy, 375
Pulmonary wedge pressure, 84 bicarbonate, 237, 240
Renal blood flow, exercise, 118
Pulmonic auscultation point, 121 cause, 247
Renal circulation, 114
Pulse, venous, 121–123 compensation, 238, 241
Renal clearance, 207–208
Pulse pressure, factors affecting, 104–105 defined, 236
estimate of glomerular filtration rate,
Pumping action, coronary circulation, 112 diagnosis, 240, 243
213–214
416
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 416 15/10/22 2:22P
INDEX
graphical representation, 244 salivary, 387–388 Sodium (Na+) current, inward, 41
metabolic acidosis with, 241 small intestinal, 395–396 Sodium/potassium adenosine
mixed metabolic and, 242 nephron, 191, 192 triphosphatase (Na+/K+ ATPase), 24
Respiratory centers, central, 171–172 p aminohippuric acid, 209–211 proximal tubule, 222
Respiratory compensation potassium, 230 pump, 205
metabolic acidosis with, 241, 243 proximal tubule, 222 Sodium potassium chloride (Na+ K+
metabolic alkalosis with, 242, 243 rate, 191 2Cl–) transporter, 224
Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), SERCA (sarcoplasmic endoplasmic Solute(s)
147–148 reticulum calcium adenosine concentration, 6
Respiratory exchange ratio (RER), 159 triphosphatase), 59, 60, 63 net gain, 8
Respiratory quotient (RQ), 159 Series circuits, 80 renal handling of important, 212
and alveolar PO2, 160 Serosa, 381, 382 transport, 203–206
Respiratory stress, 172–173 Sertoli cells, 354–356 dynamics of protein mediated,
Respiratory system, 133 Sex steroids, female, 368–370 204–206
neutral or equilibrium point, 140 S1 heart sound, 119, 120 mechanisms, 203
Resting membrane potential, 23–25 S2 heart sound, 119, 120–121 Somatostatinomas, 310
cardiac, 38 abnormal splitting, 121 Somatostatin (SST), 258
Resting skeletal muscle, blood flow, 111 S3 heart sound, 119, 121 SO (supraoptic) nucleus, 262, 263
Restrictive cardiomyopathy, 91 S4 heart sound, 119, 121 Spermatogenesis, 359
Restrictive pulmonary disease, 150, 152–153, Sheehan syndrome, 259, 375 Sperm count, 371
155 Shunt(s) Spirometer, 134
Reverse triiodothyronine (reverse T3), intrapulmonary, 183–184 Splanchnic circulation, 113, 114
331, 334 left to right, 184–186 Splay, 209
Reynold’s number, 79 right to left, 178 Spontaneous pneumothorax, 144
Rickets, 325 SIADH (syndrome of inappropriate SR (sarcoplasmic reticulum)
Right atrial pressure (RAP), 84, 98 secretion of antidiuretic hormone), regulation of cytosolic calcium, 59–60
cardiac output, 100 265–266 ultrastructure, 56
mean arterial pressure, 105 Simple diffusion, 203 SST (somatostatin), 258
Right atrium, fetal circulation, 115, 116 Sinoatrial (SA) node, control of Starling equation, 12
Right to left shunt, ventilation perfusion excitability, 42–43 Starling forces, 11
mismatch, 178 Sinoatrial (SA) node cells StAR (steroidogenic acute regulatory
Right ventricle, fetal circulation, 115, 116 action potentials, 41–42 protein), 355
RPF (renal plasma flow), 210 automaticity, 37 Stenotic valve, 126
RQ (respiratory quotient), 159 Skeletal muscle aortic, 126
and alveolar PO2, 160 altering force, 60–62 mitral, 128
RV (residual volume), 133, 134 blood flow, 111 Stercobilin, 394
R wave, 43 cardiac vs., 63–64 Steroid hormones, 251, 252
Ryanodine (RyR), 59 excitation contraction coupling, 55–62 synthetic pathways, 270–271
exercise, 117 Steroidogenic acute regulatory protein
S mechanics, 67–71 (StAR), 355
Sacubitril, 264 length tension curves, 68–69 Stomach
Salivary secretions, 387–388 preload and afterload, 67 digestion, 398, 399
SA node. See Sinoatrial (SA) node red vs. white, 69–70 emptying, 386
Sarcolemma, 56, 59 velocity and load, 69 endocrine and neural control, 385
Sarcomere, 55, 56 structure function relationships, 55–58 gastric motility, 385–386
functional proteins, 57 Slow waves, 383 Stress, glucocorticoids, 272
Sarcoplasmic endoplasmic reticulum Small intestinal motility, 386 Stress hormones, 272
calcium adenosine triphosphatase Small intestinal secretions, 395–396 Stretch receptors, 261–263
Small intestine, digestion, 398, 399–400 Striated muscles, 63–64
(SERCA), 59, 60, 63
Smooth muscle, 64–66 Stroke volume (SV), 89
Sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR)
characteristics, 383–384 pulse pressure, 104
regulation of cytosolic calcium, 59–60
ultrastructure, 56 Sodium chloride (NaCl), distal tubule, 225 systolic pressure, 104
Saturation kinetics, 204 Sodium/iodide symporter (NIS), 329 Stroke work, coronary circulation, 112
SCN (suprachiasmatic nucleus), 274 Sodium (Na+) ST segment, 43, 44
Secondary transport, 204–205 clearance, 216–217 changes, 51
Second degree heart block, 49 insulin deficiency, 308 Sublingual gland secretions, 387
Secretin, 383, 390, 392 normal values, 5 Submandibular gland secretions, 387
Secretion(s) proximal tubule, 220 Submucosa, 381, 382
gastrointestinal, 387–396 reabsorption, 276 Submucosal plexus, 381, 382
resting membrane potential, 24, 25 Subthreshold stimulus, 29
bile, 393–395
Sodium (Na+) channels, voltage gated Suckling, lactation, 376–378
gastric, 388–390
(fast), 28–29 Sucrase, 398
pancreatic, 390–392
417
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 417 15/10/22 2:22P
Pharmacology Biochemistry
PHYSIOLOGY
Physiology MedicaGlenetics
Sulfonylurea derivatives, 303 control, 354–355 Thyrotoxicosis, 341–342
Summation, 61, 62 cryptorchid, 359 Thyrotropin. See Thyroid stimulating
Superior vena cava, fetal circulation, 115, 116 endocrine function, 356–357 hormone (thyrotropin, TSH)
Suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), 274 Testicular 17α OH deficiency, 290 Thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH), 258
Supraoptic (SO) nucleus, 262, 263 Testosterone, 357 Thyroxine. See Tetraiodothyronine
Pathology BehavioraSlcience/SociaSlciences
Surface tension, lung recoil, 146 age related changes, 357, 358 (thyroxine, T4)
Surfactant, 147, 148 control of testes, 354, 356 Tidal volume (Vt), 133, 134
SV. See Stroke volume (SV) normal male development, 358 Titin, 55, 56, 63
SVR (systemic vascular resistance), 78, 86 Tetraiodothyronine (thyroxine, T4) TLC (total lung capacity), 133, 134
Swallowing, 384 activation and degradation, 333–334 TM (transport maximum) system
Microbiology
disorders, 385 growth and metabolism, 335 tubular reabsorption, 208–209
Swan Ganz catheterization, 124 structure, 331 tubular secretion, 209–212
Swave, 43 synthesis, 330 Torsade de pointes, 40
Sympathetic nervous system, 35 transport in blood, 333 Total body water, 3
GI tract, 382 Tg. See Thyroglobulin (Tg) Total lung capacity (TLC), 133, 134
glomerular filtration, 200–201 TGF (tubuloglomerular feedback), 194 Total peripheral resistance (TPR), 78, 86
Symport, 204 Theca cells, 362, 363 mean arterial pressure, 105
Synapses Thiazide diuretics, 225 Total ventilation, 134, 136
electrical, 34 Thick filament, proteins, 57 Toxic multinodular goiter, 337
between neurons, 33–34 Thin filament, proteins, 57 Toxic thyroid adenomas, 337
Synaptic buttons, 34 Third degree heart block, 49 TPO (thyroperoxidase), 330
Synaptic cleft, 32 Threshold stimulus, 29, 30 TPP (transmural pressure gradient), 138,
Synaptic transmission, 32–36 Thyroglobulin (Tg), 327, 328 139, 149
electrical synapses, 34 synthesis, 329, 330 TPR (total peripheral resistance), 78, 86
neuromuscular junction, 32–33 thyroid hormone secretion, 332 mean arterial pressure, 105
neuronal excitability/conduction Thyroid adenomas, toxic, 337 Transmural pressure gradient (PTM, TPP),
decreased, 35 Thyroid binding globulin (TBG), 333 138, 139, 149
increased, 36 Thyroid disease, autoimmune, 337, 338 Transport
peripheral nervous system, 35 Thyroid follicle, 327, 328 active, 203
synapses between neurons, 33–34 Thyroid function dynamics of protein mediated, 204–206
Syndrome of inappropriate secretion of pregnancy, 375 facilitated, 203
antidiuretic hormone (SIADH), tests, 337 mechanisms, 203
265–266 Thyroid gland, 327–328 net, 207
Syndrome X, 307 overall effects of thyrotropin, 337 organic acids/bases, 211–212
Systemic circuit, 75 response to low intake of iodine, 339 primary and secondary, 204–205
exercise, 117 Thyroid hormones, 327–343 rate, 204
hemodynamics, 93–95 activation and degradation, 333–334 regional, 219–233
pressure, flow, resistance, 76–78 carbohydrate metabolism, 335 collecting duct, 226–228
series and parallel circuits, 80 cardiovascular effects, 335 disorders of potassium homeostasis,
structure function relationships, 76 classification, 251, 252 230–232
Systemic vascular resistance (SVR), 78, 86 dietary intake, 327 distal tubule, 225–226, 231
Systemic veins, vessel compliance, 81 growth and maturation, 335 loop of Henle, 223–225
Systolic blood pressure, factors affecting, 104 lipid metabolism, 335 proximal tubule, 219–223
Systolic dysfunction, 90–92 measurement, 254 renal failure, 232–234
Systolic performance, ventricle, 83–86 metabolic rate, 334 renal tubular acidosis, 229
Systolic sounds, 120–121 physiologic actions, 334–335 Transport maximum (TM) system
secretion, 332 tubular reabsorption, 208–209
T control, 336–338 tubular secretion, 209–212
T3. See Triiodothyronine (T3) pathologic changes, 338–343 Traumatic pneumothorax, 144
storage, 330 TRH (thyrotropin releasing hormone), 258
T4. See Tetraiodothyronine (thyroxine, T4)
structure, 331 Tricuspid auscultation point, 121
Tachyarrhythmias, cardiac output, 100
Tachycardia synthesis, 329–330 Triglyceride(s), digestion, 398
endogenously mediated, 99 transport in blood, 333 Triglyceride metabolism
pathologically mediated, 99 Thyroiditis insulin deficiency, 308
TBG (thyroid binding globulin), 333 Hashimoto’s, 254, 340 insulin effects, 300–301
Temperature, spermatogenesis, 359 subacute, 337, 342 Triiodothyronine (T3)
Temperature regulation, cutaneous Thyroid stimulating hormone (thyrotropin, activation and degradation, 333–334
circulation, 113–114 TSH) growth and metabolism, 335
Tension pneumothorax, 144 overall effects on thyroid, 337 reverse, 331, 334
serum, 337 structure, 331
Teriparatide, 324
Thyroid storm, 342 synthesis, 330
Terminal cisternae, 56, 59
Thyroperoxidase (TPO), 330 transport in blood, 333
Testes
418
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 418 15/10/22 2:22P
INDEX
Tropomyosin, 57, 58 Venous return (VR), 97–98 VMA (vanillylmandelic acid), 293
Troponin, 57, 58 and cardiac output, 97–98, 100–101 Vmax (maximum velocity), 70
Trousseau’s sign, 322 Venous system, exercise, 117 Voiding phase, micturition, 193
Trypsin, 391, 398 Ventilation, 134–137 Voltage and ligand gated ion channel,
Trypsin inhibitor, 390 alveolar, 136–137, 158 21–22
Trypsinogen, 391 and alveolar PCO2, 158–159 Voltage gated ion channel, 20, 21
TSH. See Thyroid stimulating hormone neural regulation, 170–172 action potential, 28–29
(thyrotropin, TSH) assisted control mode, 142 Volume changes, due to changes in body
T tubule, 56, 59 cardiovascular changes, 142 hydration, 9
Tubular reabsorption, 191 dead space, 134–136 Volume measurement, body
glucose, 208–209 minute, 136 compartments, 14–15
Tubular secretion, 191 positive pressure, 142–143 Volume overload, 90–91
p aminohippuric acid, 209–211 regional differences, 175–176 Volume regulation, 261–263
Tubuloglomerular feedback (TGF), 194 total, 134, 136 VO2 (oxygen consumption), Fick
Turbulent flow, 79–80 Ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) principle, 107, 108
T wave, 43, 44 relationships, 176–179 V/Q. See Ventilation/perfusion (V/Q)
Ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) differences, VR (vascular resistance), 76–78
U 175–179 cardiac output, 101
UES (upper esophageal sphincter), 384 exercise, 179 VR (venous return), 97–98
Ultrafiltrate, 191 hypoxic vasoconstriction, 179 and cardiac output, 97–98, 100–101
Umbilical arteries, fetal circulation, 116 regional differences in blood flow, 176 Vt (tidal volume), 133, 134
Umbilical vein, fetal circulation, 115, 116 regional differences in intrapleural v wave, venous pulse, 122, 123
Ungated ion channel, 20, 21 pressure, 175
regional differences in ventilation, 175–176 W
Ungated potassium channels, cardiac
ventilation perfusion relationships,
resting membrane potential, 38 Wall tension, 81–82
176–179
Uniport, 204 Water (H2O)
Upper esophageal sphincter (UES), 384 Ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) matching, net gain, 8
Urate, proximal tubule, 222 176–177 net loss, 8
Urea clearance, 217 Ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) mismatch, 178 proximal tubule, 221
Uric acid, proximal tubule, 222 hypoxemia, 182–183 reabsorption, 276
Urine analysis, hormone levels, 254 Ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) units, 177, total body, 3
Uterine endometrium, hormonal 178 Water soluble hormones, 251–252
maintenance, 372–373 hypoxemia, 182–183 Waves, ECG, 43–44, 46
Ventricle, systolic performance, 83–86 Weight bearing stress, bone remodeling,
V Ventricular contractility, systolic pressure, 316
104
Valvular dysfunction, 126–129 Weightlessness, effect on ADH secretion,
Ventricular function
aortic insufficiency regurgitation, 127 263
cardiac output, 98, 100
aortic stenosis, 126 Wenckebach heart block, 49
curves, 87–89
mitral insufficiency regurgitation, 129 “West zones,” lung, 175
Ventricular preload, 88
mitral stenosis, 128 White muscle, 70
Vanillylmandelic acid (VMA), 293 Ventricular septal defect, left to right Wolffian duct, 358
Vasa recta, 189, 223 shunt, 185 Wolff Parkinson White syndrome, 50–51
Ventricular volumes, 89
Vascular compartment, 3
Venules, 76 X
Vascular function, cardiac output, 98, 100
Vessel compliance, 81
Vascular resistance (VR), 76–78 Xanthine oxidase, 222
pulse pressure, 104–105
cardiac output, 101 x descent, venous pulse, 122, 123
Villi, 395
Vasoconstriction, 95
VIPomas, 310
cardiac output, 101 Y
Virilization, 371
hypoxic, 179 Vital capacity (VC), 133, 134 y descent, venous pulse, 122, 123
Vasodilation, 94
forced, 149–150
cardiac output, 101 pulmonary function testing, 149–150 Z
VC. See Vital capacity (VC)
Vitamin D Z lines, 55, 56, 58
Veins, 76
actions, 319–320 Zona fasciculata, 269
systemic, vessel compliance, 81
bone remodeling, 316 enzyme deficiency, 286, 287
Velocity
calcium homeostasis, 318–320 steroid synthesis, 270, 272
blood flow, 79
sources and synthesis, 318–319 Zona glomerulosa, 269
and load, 70
Vitamin D2, 318 enzyme deficiency, 285, 288
maximum, 70
Vitamin D deficiency, and secondary steroid synthesis, 271
Venae cavae, 76
hyperparathyroidism, 323 Zona reticularis, 269
Venous compliance, mean systemic filling
Vitamin D excess, and secondary enzyme deficiency, 286, 287
pressure, 98
hypoparathyroidism, 323 steroid synthesis, 270, 272
Venous pulse, 121–123
419
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 419 15/10/22 2:22P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 420 15/10/22 2:22P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 421 15/10/22 2:22P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 422 15/10/22 2:22P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 423 15/10/22 2:22P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 424 15/10/22 2:22P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 425 15/10/22 2:22P
KP00726_Bookmark.indb 426 15/10/22 2:22P
