PRECLINICAL
ANATOMY
REVIEW
2023
®
FOR USMLE
STEP 1 AND
®
COMLEX USA
LEVEL 1
USMLE® and United States Medical Licensing Examination® isa joint program of the National Board of
Medical Examiners (NBME) and the Federation of State Medical Boards (FSMB), which are not affiliated with
Kaplan and were not involved in the production of, and do not endorse, this product. COMLEX USA® is a
registered trademark of the National Board of Osteopathic Medical Examiners, Inc. (NBOME), which is not
affiliated with Kaplan and was not involved in the production of, and does not endorse, this product
PRECLINICAL
ANATOMY
REVIEW
2023
FOR USMLE® STEP 1 AND
COMLEX USA® LEVEL 1
USMLE® and United States Medical Licensing Examination® is ajoint program of the National Board of Medical Examiners (NBME) and the Federation
of State Medical Boards (FSMB), which are not affiliated with Kaplan and were not involved in the production of, and do not endorse, this product.
COMLEX USA® isaregistered trademark ofthe National Board ofOsteopathic Medical Examiners, Inc. (NBOME), which is not affiliated with Kaplan an
was not involved inthe production of,and does not endorse, this product.
USMLE® and United States Medical Licensing Examination® is a joint program of the National Board of Medical Examiners
(NBME) and the Federation of State Medical Boards (FSMB), which are not affiliated with Kaplan and were not involved in
the production of, and do not endorse, this product.
COMLEX USA® is a registered trademark of the National Board of Osteopathic Medical Examiners, Inc. (NBOME), which is
not affiliated with Kaplan and was not involved in the production of, and does not endorse, this product.
This publication is designed to provide accurate information in regard to the subject matter covered as of its publication
date, with the understanding that knowledge and best practice constantly evolve. The publisher is not engaged in rendering
medical, legal, accounting, or other professional service. Ifmedical or legal advice or other expert assistance is required,
the services of a competent professional should be sought. This publication is not intended for use in clinical practice or
the delivery of medical care. To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the Editors assume any liability for any
injury and/or damage to persons or property arising out of or related to any use of the material contained in this book.
© 2023 by Kaplan North America, LLC
Published by Kaplan Medical, a division of Kaplan North America, LLC.
1515 West Cypress Creek Road
Fort Lauderdale, Florida 33309
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
All rights reserved. The text of this publication, or any part thereof, may not be reproduced in any manner whatsoever without
written permission from the publisher.
Course ISBN: 978 1 5062 8437 8
Course Kit ISBN: 978 1 5062 8465 1
Retail ISBN: 978 1 5062 8427 9
Retail Kit ISBN: 978 1 5062 8463 7
Kit items come as a set and should not be broken out and sold separately.
Kaplan Publishing print books are available at special quantity discounts to use for sales promotions, employee premiums,
or educational purposes. For more information or to purchase books, please call the Simon &Schuster special sales
department at 866 506 1949
Editors
James White, PhD
Assistant Professor of Cell Biology
School of Osteopathic Medicine
Rowan University
Stratford, NJ
Adjunct Assistant Professor of Cell and Developmental Biology
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine
Philadelphia, PA
David Seiden, PhD
Professor of Neuroscience and Cell Biology
Rutgers–Robert Wood Johnson Medical School
Piscataway, N
We want to hear what you think. What do you like or not like about the Notes?
Please email us at medfeedback@kaplan.com
Table of Contents
PART I: EARLY EMBRYOLOGY AND HISTOLOGY: EPITHELIA
CHAPTER 1: Gonad Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
CHAPTER 2: First 8 Weeks of Development. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
CHAPTER 3: Histology: Epithelia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
PART II: GROSS ANATOMY
CHAPTER 1: Back and Autonomic Nervous System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
CHAPTER 2: Thorax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
CHAPTER 3: Abdomen, Pelvis, and Perineum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
CHAPTER 4: Upper Limb. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
CHAPTER 5: Lower Limb . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 195
CHAPTER 6: Head and Neck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 207
PART III: NEUROSCIENCE
CHAPTER 1: Nervous System Organization and Development . . . . . . . . . . . 225
CHAPTER 2: Histology of the Nervous System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 235
CHAPTER 3: Ventricular System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 245
CHAPTER 4: The Spinal Cord. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 251
CHAPTER 5: The Brain Stem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 275
CHAPTER 6: The Cerebellum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 309
CHAPTER 7: Basal Ganglia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 317
CHAPTER 8: Visual Pathways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 325
CHAPTER 9: Diencephalon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 335
CHAPTER 10: Cerebral Cortex . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 343
CHAPTER 11: Limbic System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 361
INDEX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 367
v
PART I
EARLY EMBRYOLOGY AND
HISTOLOGY: EPITHELI

1
Gonad Development
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Explain information related to indifferent gonad
❏ Interpret scenarios on testis and ovary
❏ Answer questions about meiosis
❏ Interpret scenarios on spermatogenesis
❏ Solve problems concerning oogenesis
GONAD DEVELOPMENT
Although sex is determined at fertilization, the gonads initially go through an
indifferent stage weeks 4–7 when there are no specific ovarian or testicular
characteristics. The indifferent gonads develop in a longitudinal elevation or ridge
of intermediate mesoderm called the urogenital ridge. The components of the
indifferent gonads are as follows:
• Primordial germ cells provide a critical inductive influence on gonad
development, migrating in at week 4. They arise from the lining cells in
the wall of the yolk sac.
• Primary sex cords are finger like extensions of the surface epithelium
which grow into the gonad that are populated by the migrating primordial
germ cells.
• Mesonephric (Wolffian) and the paramesonephric (Mullerian) ducts of
the indifferent gonad contribute to the male and female genital tracts,
respectively.
The indifferent gonads develop into either the testis or ovary.
Development of the testis and male reproductive system is directed by the
following:
• Sry gene on the short arm of the Y chromosome, which encodes for
testis determining factor (TDF)
• Testosterone, which is secreted by the Leydig cells
• Müllerian inhibiting factor (MIF), which is secreted by the Sertoli cells
• Dihydrotestosterone (DHT): external genitalia
Development of the ovary and female reproductive system requires estrogen.
Ovarian development occurs in the absence of the Sry gene and in the presence of
the WNT4 gene.
3
PART I | EARLY EMBRYOLOGY AND HISTOLOGY: EPITHELIA
Anatomy Immunology
MIF: Müllerian inhibiting factor
TDF: testis determining factor
Primordial
germ cells
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Yolk sac
Urogenital ridge
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Mesonephric duct (Wolffian)
MIF: Müllerian inhibiting factor Paramesonephric duct
TDF: testis determining factor (Müllerian)
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Indifferent gonad
TDF
Testosterone No factors
MIF
Microbiology
Testis Ovary
and male and female
genital system genital system
Figure I 1 1. Development of Testis and Ovary
Figure I 1 1. Development of Testis and Ovary
GAMETOGENESIS
Meiosis
Meiosis, occurring within the testis and ovary, is a specialized process of cell
division that produces the male gamete (spermatogenesis) and female gamete
(oogenesis). There are notable differences between spermatogenesis and
oogenesis.
Two cell divisions take place in meiosis. In meiosis I, the following events occur:
• Synapsis: pairing of 46 homologous chromosomes
• Crossing over: exchange of segments of DNA
• Disjunction: separation of 46 homologous chromosome pairs
(no centromere splitting) into 2 daughter cells, each containing
23 chromosome pairs
In meiosis II, synapsis does not occur, nor does crossing over. Disjunction does
occur with centromere splitting.
CHAPTER 1 | GONAD DEVELOPMENT
Type B
Spermatogonia (46, 2n) (Diploid)
Oogonia
Meiosis I
Primary
spermatocyte DNA replication
Primary (46, 4n)
oocyte
Synapsis
Crossover
Cell division
Alignment and disjunction
Centromeres do not split
Secondary
spermatocyte
(23, 2n)
Secondary
oocyte
Meiosis II
Cell division
Alignment and
disjunction
Centromeres split
Gamete (23, 1n)
(Haploid)
Figure I 1 2. Meiosis
Figure I 1 2. Meiosis
PART I | EARLY EMBRYOLOGY AND HISTOLOGY: EPITHELIA
Anatomy Immunology
Spermatogenesis
At week 4, primordial germ cells arrive in the indifferent gonad and remain
dormant until puberty.
Pharmacology Biochemistry
• When a boy reaches puberty, primordial germ cells differentiate into type
A spermatogonia, which serve as stem cells throughout adult life.
• Some type A spermatogonia differentiate into type B spermatogonia.
• Type B spermatogonia enter meiosis I to form primary spermatocytes.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
• Primary spermatocytes form 2 secondary spermatocytes.
• Secondary spermatocytes enter meiosis II to form 2 spermatids.
• Spermatids undergo spermiogenesis, which is a series of morphological
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
changes resulting in the mature spermatozoa.
Oogenesis
Microbiology At week 4, primordial germ cells arrive in the indifferent gonad and differentiate
into oogonia. Oogonia enter meiosis I to form primary oocytes. All primary
oocytes are formed by month 5 of fetal life; they are arrested the first time in
prophase (diplotene) of meiosis I and remain arrested until puberty.
• Primary oocytes arrested in meiosis I are present at birth.
• When a girl reaches puberty, during each monthly cycle a primary oocyte
becomes unarrested and completes meiosis I to form a secondary oocyte
and polar body.
• The secondary oocyte becomes arrested the second time in metaphase of
meiosis II and is ovulated.
• At fertilization within the uterine tube, the secondary oocyte completes
meiosis II to form a mature oocyte and polar body.
2#
First 8 Weeks of Development
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Solve problems concerning beginning of development
❏ Demonstrate understanding of the formation of the bilaminar embryo
❏ Solve problems concerning embryonic period
EARLY EMBRYOLOGY
Week 1: Beginning of Development
Fertilization occurs in the ampulla of the uterine tube when the male and female
pronuclei fuse to form a zygote. At fertilization, the secondary oocyte rapidly
completes meiosis II.
m
tio s s
ge :
ava
e
Cl
Day 2 Day 3
Embryoblast (forms embryo)
2 cell Blastula 4 cell Blastula
Day 4
Trophoblast (forms placenta)
Morula
Day 5
(46, 2N) Zygote
Blastocyst
Day 1
Fertilization Day 6 (Implantation
begins)
Ovary
Zona Corona Cytotrophoblast
pellucida radiata cells Ampulla Blastocyst cavity
of oviduct Embryoblast
Secondary oocyte arrested
Syncytiotrophoblast
in metaphase of meiosis II
Figure I 2 1. Week 1
Figure I 2 1. Week 1
7
PART I | EARLY EMBRYOLOGY AND HISTOLOGY: EPITHELIA
Anatomy Immunology
Prior to fertilization, spermatozoa undergo 2 changes in the female genital tract:
• Capacitation consists of the removal of several proteins from the plasma
membrane of the acrosome of the spermatozoa. It occurs over about
Pharmacology Biochemistry 7 hours in the female reproductive tract.
• Hydrolytic enzymes are released from the acrosome used by the sperm to
penetrate the zona pellucida. This results in a cortical reaction that
prevents other spermatozoa penetrating the zona pellucida thus preventing
polyspermy.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
During the first 4–5 days of week 1, the zygote undergoes rapid mitotic division
(cleavage) in the oviduct to form a blastula, consisting of increasingly smaller
blastomeres. This becomes the morula (32 cell stage).
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
A blastocyst forms as fluid develops in the morula. The blastocyst consists of an
inner cell mass known as the embryoblast, and the outer cell mass known as the
trophoblast, which becomes the placenta.
Microbiology At the end of week 1, the trophoblast differentiates into the cytotrophoblast and
syncytiotrophoblast and then implantation begins.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Ectopic Pregnancy
Tubal (most common) form usually occurs when the blastocyst
implants within the ampulla of the uterine tube because of delayed
transport. Risk factors include endometriosis, pelvic inflammatory disease,
tubular pelvic surgery, and exposure to diethylstilbestrol (DES.) Clinical
signs include abnormal or brisk uterine bleeding, sudden onset of abdominal
pain (may be confused with appendicitis), missed menstrual period (e.g.,
LMP 60 days ago), positive human chorionic gonadotropin test, culdocentesis
showing intraperitoneal blood, and positive sonogram.
Abdominal form usually occurs in the rectouterine pouch (pouch of
Douglas).
For implantation to occur, the zona pellucida must degenerate. The blastocyst
usually implants within the posterior wall of the uterus. The embryonic pole of
blastocyst implants first. The blastocyst implants within the functional layer of the
endometrium during the progestational phase of the menstrual cycle.
Week 2: Formation of the Bilaminar Embryo
In week 2, the embryoblast differentiates into the epiblast and hypoblast, forming
a bilaminar embryonic disk. The epiblast forms the amniotic cavity and hypo
blast cells migrate to form the primary yolk sac. The prechordal plate, formed
from fusion of epiblast and hypoblast cells, is the site of the future mouth.
CHAPTER 2 | FIRST 8 WEEkS OF DEVELOPMENT
Hypoblast CLINICAL CORRELATE
Bilaminar disk
Epiblast Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), a
glycoprotein produced by the
Endometrial
syncytiotrophoblast, stimulates progesterone
blood vessel
production by the corpus luteum. hCG can
be assayed in maternal blood or urine and is
Lacuna spaces
the basis for early pregnancy testing. hCG is
detectable throughout pregnancy.
Endometrial
gland • Low hCG may predict a spontaneous
abortion or ectopic pregnancy.
Syncytiotrophoblast
Prechordal
• Implantation • High hCG may predict a multiple
plate
• hCG
pregnancy, hydatidiform mole, or
Chorionic
gestational trophoblastic disease.
cavity Connecting
stalk
Yolk sac
Amniotic cavity
Primary villi
Chorion
Extraembryonic mesoderm
Cytotrophoblast
Figure FigureI 3I 21.2.WeWeekek 2 2
Extraembryonic mesoderm is derived from the epiblast. Extraembryonic
somatic mesoderm lines the cytotrophoblast, forms the connecting stalk, and
covers the amnion. Extraembryonic visceral mesoderm covers the yolk sac.
The connecting stalk suspends the conceptus within the chorionic cavity. The wall
of the chorionic cavity is called the chorion, consisting of extraembryonic somatic
mesoderm, the cytotrophoblast, and the syncytiotrophoblast.
The syncytiotrophoblast continues its growth into the endometrium to make
contact with endometrial blood vessels and glands. No mitosis occurs in the
syncytiotrophoblast. The cytotrophoblast is mitotically active.
Hematopoiesis occurs initially in the mesoderm surrounding the yolk sac (up to 6
weeks) and later in the fetal liver, spleen, thymus (6 weeks to third trimester), and
bone marrow.
PART I | EARLY EMBRYOLOGY AND HISTOLOGY: EPITHELIA
Anatomy Immunology
Weeks 3–8: Embryonic Period
All major organ systems begin to develop during the weeks 3–8. By the end of this
period, the embryo begins to look human, and the nervous and cardiovascular
systems start to develop. Week 3 corresponds to the first missed menstrual period.
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Dorsal View
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Cranial
Prechordal plate
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Primitive node
Primitive pit
B
Primitive streak
Microbiology
Cloacal membrane
Caudal
A
Sectional View
Cranial Primitive node & streak
Epiblast
(ectoderm)
Amnion
Notochord
Yolk sac
Mesoderm Hypoblast
Endoderm
B
Figure FigureI 4I 21.3.WWeeekek 3 3
During this time gastrulation also takes place; this is the process by which the
3 primary germ layers are produced: ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm.
It begins with the formation of the primitive streak within the epiblast.
• Ectoderm forms neuroectoderm and neural crest cells.
• Mesoderm forms paraxial mesoderm (35 pairs of somites), intermediate
mesoderm, and lateral mesoderm.
1
CHAPTER 2 | FIRST 8 WEEkS OF DEVELOPMENT
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Sacrococcygeal teratoma: a tumor that arises from remnants of the primitive
streak; contains various types of tissue (bone, nerve, hair, etc.)
Chordoma: a tumor that arises from remnants of the notochord, found either
intracranially or in the sacral region
Hydatidiform mole: results from the partial or complete replacement of the
trophoblast by dilated villi
• In a complete mole, there is no embryo; a haploid sperm fertilizes a
blighted ovum and reduplicates so that the karyotype is 46,XX, with all
chromosomes of paternal origin. In a partial mole, there is a haploid set of
maternal chromosomes and usually 2 sets of paternal chromosomes so that
the typical karyotype is 69,XXY.
• Molar pregnancies have high levels of hCG, and 20% develop into a
malignant trophoblastic disease, including choriocarcinoma.
1
PART I | EARLY EMBRYOLOGY AND HISTOLOGY: EPITHELIA
Anatomy Immunology
Table I 2 1. Germ Layer Derivatives
Ectoderm Mesoderm Endoderm
Surface ectoderm Muscle Forms epithelial lining of:
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Epidermis Smooth GI tract: foregut, midgut, and
hindgut
Hair Cardiac
Lower respiratory system: larynx,
Nails Skeletal
trachea, bronchi, and lung
Physiology Inner ear, external eMaredicalGenetics Connective tissue
Genitourinary system: urinary
Enamel of teeth All serous membranes
bladder, urethra, and lower vagina
Lens of eye Bone and cartilage
Pharyngeal pouches:
Anterior pituitary (Rathke’s pouch) Blood, lymph, cardiovascular
• Auditory tube and middle ear
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences organs
Parotid gland
• Palatine tonsils
Adrenal cortex
Anal canal below
• Parathyroid glands
Gonads and internal reproductive
pectinate line
• Thymus
organs
Neuroectoderm
Microbiology Forms parenchyma of:
Spleen
Neural tube
• Liver
Kidney and ureter
Central nervous system
• Pancreas
Dura mater
Retina and optic nerve
• Submandibular and sublingual
Notochord
Pineal gland glands
Nucleus pulposus
Neurohypophysis • Follicles of thyroid gland
Astrocytes Parafollicular (C) cells
Oligodendrocytes
Neural crest ectoderm
Adrenal medulla
Ganglia
Sensory: pseudounipolar
neurons
Autonomic: postganglionic
neurons
Pigment cells
Schwann cells
Meninges
Pia and arachnoid mater
Pharyngeal arch cartilage
Odontoblasts
Aorticopulmonary septum
Endocardial cushions
Extra embryonic structures
Yolk sac derivatives:
Primordial germ cells
Early blood cells and blood
vessels
1
3#
Histology: Epithelia
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Demonstrate understanding of epithelial cells
❏ Use knowledge of epithelium
❏ Interpret scenarios on cytoskeletal elements
❏ Explain information related to cell adhesion molecules
❏ Answer questions about cell surface specializations
Histology is the study of normal tissues. Groups of cells make up tissues, tissues NOTE
form organs, organs form organ systems, and systems make up the organism.
Only certain aspects of epithelia will be
Each organ consists of 4 types of tissue: epithelial, connective, nervous, and reviewed here; other aspects of histology
muscular. appear elsewhere in this book.
EPITHELIUM
Epithelial cells are often polarized: the structure, composition, and function of the
apical surface membrane differ from those of the basolateral surfaces. The polarity
is established by the presence of tight junctions that separate these 2 regions.
Internal organelles are situated symmetrically in the cell. Membrane polarity and
tight junctions are essential for the transport functions of epithelia.
Many simple epithelia transport substances from one side to the other (kidney
epithelia transport salts and sugars; intestinal epithelia transport nutrients,
antibodies, etc.). There are 2 basic mechanisms used for these transports:
• Transcellular pathway through which larger molecules and a combination
of diffusion and pumping in the case of ions that pass through the cell
• Paracellular pathway that permits movement between cells
Tight junctions regulate the paracellular pathway, because they prevent backflow
of transported material and keep basolateral and apical membrane components
separate.
Epithelial polarity is essential to the proper functioning of epithelial cells; when
polarity is disrupted, disease can develop. For example, epithelia lining the trachea,
bronchi, intestine, and pancreatic ducts transport chloride from basolateral surface
to lumen via pumps in the basolateral surface and channels in the apical surface.
1
PART I | EARLY EMBRYOLOGY AND HISTOLOGY: EPITHELIA
Anatomy Immunology
The transport provides a driving force for Na by producing electrical polarization
of the epithelium. Thus NaCl moves across, and water follows. In cystic fibrosis the
apical Cl channels do not open. Failure of water transport results in thickening of
the mucous layer covering the epithelia.
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Transformed cells may lose their polarized organization, and this change can be
easily detected by using antibodies against proteins specific for either the apical or
basolateral surfaces. Loss of polarity in the distribution of membrane proteins may
eventually become useful as an early index of neuroplasticity.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Epithelia are always lined on the basal side by connective tissue containing blood
vessels. Since epithelia are avascular, interstitial tissue fluids provide epithelia with
oxygen and nutrients.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Epithelia modify the 2 compartments that they separate. The epithelial cells may
either secrete into or absorb from each compartment, and may selectively trans
port solutes from one side of the barrier to the other.
Epithelia renew themselves continuously, some very rapidly (skin and intestinal
Microbiology
linings), some at a slower rate. This means that the tissue contains stem cells that
continuously proliferate. The daughter cells resulting from each cell division either
remain in the pool of dividing cells or differentiate.
Epithelial Subtypes
The epithelial subtypes are as follows:
• Simple cuboidal epithelium (e.g., renal tubules, salivary gland acini)
• Simple columnar epithelium (e.g., small intestine)
• Simple squamous epithelium (e.g., endothelium, mesothelium, epithelium
lining the inside of the renal glomerular capsule)
• Stratified squamous epithelium: nonkeratinized (e.g., esophagus) and
keratinizing (e.g., skin)
• Pseudostratified columnar epithelium (e.g., trachea, epididymis)
• Transitional epithelium (urothelium) (e.g., ureter and bladder)
• Stratified cuboidal epithelium (e.g., salivary gland ducts)
CYTOSkELETAL ELEMENTS
Microfilaments
Microfilaments are actin proteins. They are composed of globular monomers of
G actin that polymerize to form helical filaments of F actin. Actin polymerization
is ATP dependent. The F actin filaments are 7 nm diameter filaments that are
constantly ongoing assembly and disassembly. F actin has a distinct polarity. The
barbed end (the “plus” end) is the site of polymerization and the pointed end is the
site of depolymerization. Tread milling is the balance in the activity at the 2 ends.
1
CHAPTER 3 | HISTOLOGY: EPITHELIA
In conjunction with myosin, actin microfilaments provide contractile and motile
forces of cells including the formation of a contractile ring that provides a basis
for cytokinesis during mitosis and meiosis. Actin filaments are linked to cell
membranes at tight junctions and at the zonula adherens, and form the core of
microvilli.
Intermediate Filaments CLINICAL CORRELATE
Intermediate filaments are 10 nm diameter filaments that are usually stable once When malignant cells begin to invade an
formed. These filaments provide structural stability to cells. There are 4 types:
epithelium, the first step results from a loss
of expression of cadherins, which weakens
• Type I: keratins (keratins are found in all epithelial cells)
the epithelium.
• Type II: intermediate filaments comprising a diverse group
• Type III: intermediate filaments forming neurofilaments in neurons
CLINICAL CORRELATE
• Type IV: 3 types of lamins forming a meshwork rather than individual
filaments inside the nuclear envelope of all cells Changes in intermediate filaments are
evident in neurons in Alzheimer’s and
cirrhotic liver disease.
Microtubules
Microtubules consist of 25 nm diameter hollow tubes. Like actin, microtubules
undergo continuous assembly and disassembly. They provide “tracks” for intracel
lular transport of vesicles and molecules. Such transport exists in all cells but is
CLINICAL CORRELATE
particularly important in axons. Transport requires specific ATPase motor
Colchicine prevents microtubule
molecules; dynein drives retrograde transport and kinesin drives anterograde
transport. polymerization and is used to prevent
neutrophil migration in gout. Vinblastine and
Microtubules are found in true cilia and flagella, and utilize dynein to convey
vincristine are used in cancer therapy
motility to these structures. Microtubules form the mitotic spindle during mitosis
because they inhibit the formation of the
and meiosis.
mitotic spindle.
CELL ADHESION MOLECULES
Cell adhesion molecules are surface molecules that allow cells to adhere to one
another or to components of the extracellular matrix. The expression of adhesion
molecules on the surface of a given cell may change with time, altering its interac
tion with adjacent cells or the extracellular matrix.
• Cadherin and selectin are calcium ion dependent adhesion molecules.
The extracellular portion binds to a cadherin dimer on another cell (trans
binding).
– Cytoplasmic portions of cadherins are linked to cytoplasmic actin
filaments by the catenin complex of proteins
• Integrins are calcium independent adhesion molecules. They are trans
membrane surface molecules with extracellular domains that bind to fibronec
tin and laminin, which are components of extracellular basement membrane.
– Cytoplasmic portions of integrins bind to actin filaments
– Integrins form a portion of hemidesmosomes but are also important in
interactions between leukocytes and endothelial cells
1
PART I | EARLY EMBRYOLOGY AND HISTOLOGY: EPITHELIA
Anatomy Immunology
CELL SURFACE SPECIALIZATIONS
Cell Adhesion
Pharmacology Biochemistry
A cell must physically interact via cell surface molecules with its external environ
CLINICAL CORRELATE
ment, whether it be the extracellular matrix or basement membrane. The base
Pemphigus Vulgaris ment membrane is a sheet like structure underlying virtually all epithelia, which
consists of basal lamina (made of type IV collagen, glycoproteins [e.g., laminin],
• Autoantibodies against desmosomal
and proteoglycans [e.g., heparin sulfate]), and reticular lamina (composed of
Physiology MedicalGenetics
proteins in skin cells
reticular fibers). Cell junctions anchor cells to each other, seal boundaries between
cells, and form channels for direct transport and communication between cells.
• Painful flaccid bullae (blisters) in
The 3 types of junctional complex include anchoring, tight, and gap junctions.
oropharynx and skin that rupture easily
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
• Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation
Cell Junctions
• Treatment: corticosteroids
Tight junctions (zonula occludens) function as barriers to diffusion and
Bullous Pemphigoid determine cell polarity. They form a series of punctate contacts of adjacent
Microbiology epithelial cells near the apical end or luminal surface of epithelial cells. The major
• Autoantibodies against basement components of tight junctions are occludens (ZO 1,2,3) and claudin proteins.
membrane hemidesmosomal proteins These proteins span between the adjacent cell membranes and their cytoplasmic
parts bind to actin microfilaments.
• Widespread blistering with pruritus
Zonula adherens forms a belt around the entire apicolateral circumference of the
• Less severe than pemphigus vulgaris
cell, immediately below the tight junction of epithelium. Cadherins span between
• Rarely affects oral mucosa the cell membranes. Like the tight junctions immediately above them, the cyto
plasmic parts of cadherins are associated with actin filaments.
• Can be drug induced (e.g., middle
Desmosomes (macula adherens) function as anchoring junctions. Desmosomes
aged or older patient on multiple
provide a structural and mechanical link between cells. Cadherins span between
medications)
the cell membranes of desmosomes and internally desmosomes are anchored to
• Treatment: corticosteroids intermediate filaments in large bundles called tonofilaments.
Hemidesmosomes adhere epithelial cells to the basement membrane. The
basement membrane is a structure that consists of the basal membrane of a cell
and 2 underlying extracellular components, the basal lamina and the reticular
lamina. The basal lamina is a thin felt like extracellular layer composed of pre
dominantly of type IV collagen associated with laminin, proteoglycans, and
fibronectin that are secreted by epithelial cells. Fibronectin binds to integrins on
the cell membrane, and fibronectin and laminin in turn bind to collagen in the
basal lamina. Internally, like a desmosome, the hemidesmosomes are linked to
intermediate filaments. Below the basal lamina is the reticular lamina, composed
of reticular fibers.
Through the binding of extracellular components of hemidesmosomes to
integrins, and thus to fibronectin and laminin, the cell is attached to the basement
membrane and therefore to the extracellular matrix components outside the
basement membrane. These interactions between the cell cytoplasm and the
extracellular matrix have implications for permeability, cell motility during
embryogenesis, and cell invasion by malignant neoplasms.
Gap junctions (communicating junctions) function in cell to cell communica
tion between the cytoplasm of adjacent cells by providing a passageway for ions
such as calcium and small molecules such as cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP). The transcellular channels that make up a gap junction consist of
1
CHAPTER 3 | HISTOLOGY: EPITHELIA
connexons, which are hollow channels spanning the plasma membrane. Each
connexon consists of 6 connexin molecules. Unlike other intercellular junctions,
gap junctions are not associated with any cytoskeletal filament.
Apical
surface
Microvilli
Plasma membrane
Tight Actin microfilaments
junction
Intermediate filaments
Zonula (keratin)
adherens
Desmosome
Gap junction
Cell A Cell B Cell C
Cell D
Hemidesmosome
Basal
lamina
Figure I 3 1. Junctions
Connexon
space
Intracellular cell A
of
bilayer
2–4 nm Lipid cell B
of
bilayer
Lipid spac
Intracellular
1.5 nm
7 nm
Figure I 3 2. Gap Junction
Microvilli
Microvilli contain a core of actin microfilaments and function to increase the
absorptive surface area of an epithelial cell. They are found in columnar epithelial
cells of the small and large intestine, cells of the proximal tubule of the kidney and
on columnar epithelial respiratory cells.
Stereocilia are long, branched microvilli that are found in the male reproductive
tract (e.g., epididymis). Short stereocilia cap all sensory cells in the inner ear.
17
PART I | EARLY EMBRYOLOGY AND HISTOLOGY: EPITHELIA
Anatomy Immunology
Glycocalyx
Microvilli
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Zonula occludens
(tight junction)
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Zonula adherens
Desmosome
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Microbiology
Figure I 3 3. Apical Cell Surface/Cell Junctions
Cilia
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Cilia contain 9 peripheral pairs of microtubules and 2 central microtubules. The
kartagener syndrome is caused by an
microtubules convey motility to cilia through the ATPase dynein. Cilia bend and
absence of dynein that is required for beat on the cell surface of pseudostratified ciliated columnar respiratory epithelial
flagellar motility. It is characterized by cells to propel overlying mucous. They also form the core of the flagella, the motile
immotile spermatozoa and infertility. It is tail of sperm cells.
associated with chronic respiratory infections
because of similar defects in cilia of
respiratory epithelium.
1
PART II
GROSS ANATOM

1#
Back and Autonomic Nervous System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Solve problems concerning vertebral column
❏ Demonstrate understanding of spinal meninges
❏ Use knowledge of spinal nerves
❏ Use knowledge of autonomic nervous system
VERTEBRAL COLUMN
Embryology
During week 4, sclerotome cells of the somites (mesoderm) migrate medially to
surround the spinal cord and notochord. After proliferation of the caudal portion
of the sclerotomes, the vertebrae are formed, each consisting of the caudal part of
one sclerotome and the cephalic part of the next.
Vertebrae
The vertebral column is the central component of the axial skeleton which
functions in muscle attachments, movements, and articulations of the head and
trunk.
• The vertebrae provide a flexible support system that transfers the weight
of the body to the lower limbs and also provides protection for the spinal
cord.
• The vertebral column is composed of 32–33 vertebrae (7 cervical,
12 thoracic, 5 lumbar, and the fused 5 sacral, and 3–4 coccygeal),
intervertebral disks, synovial articulations (zygapophyseal joints) and
ligaments.
2
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Pharmacology Biochemistry
~33 vertebrae
~33 vertebrae
31 spinal nerves
31 spinal nerves
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Anterior view Lateral view Posterior view
Pathology Atlas (C1) BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Cervical
Axis (C2) Cervical
vertebrae
curvature
(7)
C7 C7
Microbiology T1 T1
Intervertebral
Thoracic
disk
Thoracic vertebrae
curvature (12)
Inter
vertebral
foramen
T12 T12
L1 L1
Lumbar
vertebrae (5)
Lumbar
curvature
L5 L5 Interlaminar
space
Sacrum
(S1–5) Sacrum (5)
Sacral
Sacral hiatus
curvature
Coccyx (caudal block)
Coccyx
Figure II 1 1. Vertebral Column
Figure II 1 1. Vertebral Column
2
CHAPTER 1 | BACk AND AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
A typical vertebra consists of an anterior body and a posterior vertebral arch
consisting of 2 pedicles and 2 laminae. The vertebral arch encloses the vertebral
(foramen) canal that houses the spinal cord. Vertebral notches of adjacent
pedicles form intervertebral foramina that provide for the exit of the spinal
nerves. The dorsal projecting spines and the lateral projecting transverse process
es provide attachment sites for muscles and ligaments.
Spinous process
Lamina
Pedicle
Transverse process
Body
Pedicle Vertebral foramen Inferior
Spinous
vertebral notch
Body process
Facet on superior Superior and
AB articular process inferior articular processes
Figure II 1 2. Typical Vertebra
Figure II 1 2. Typical Vertebra
Intervertebral disks
The intervertebral disks contribute to about 25% of the length of the vertebral
column. They form the cartilaginous joints between the vertebral bodies and
provide limited movements between the individual vertebrae.
• Each intervertebral disk is numbered by the vertebral body above the disk.
• Each intervertebral disk is composed of the following:
– Annulus fibrosus consists of the outer concentric rings of fibrocarti
lage and fibrous connective tissue. The annuli connect the adjacent
bodies and provide limited movement between the individual vertebrae.
– Nucleus pulposus is an inner soft, elastic, compressible material that
functions as a shock absorber for external forces placed on the vertebral
column. The nucleus pulposus is the postnatal remnant of the notochord.
2
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Intervertebral disk
Intervertebral foramen
Pharmacology VentralBiochemistry
Pedicle
Anterior longitudinal ligament
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Zygapophyseal
joint
Annulus Nucleus L4
fibrosus pulposus
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Spinal nerve
Posterolateral Posterior longitudinal
herniation ligament Posterior longitudinal
Microbiology ligament
Dorsal
Anterior longitudinal
ligament
A. Intervertebral Disk B. Intervertebral Foramen
Figure IFIigu1re 3. IIIn1terv3e.rtebInratelrvertebral DiDskissks
CLINICAL CORRELATE Intervertebral ligaments
The herniation of a nucleus pulposus is most The vertebral bodies are strongly supported by 2 longitudinal ligaments, both of
which are firmly attached to the intervertebral disks and to the bodies of the
commonly in a posterolateral direction due
vertebrae.
to the strength and position of the posterior
longitudinal ligament (Figure II 1 3 A). • Anterior longitudinal ligament forms a broad band of fibers that
connects the anterior surfaces of the bodies of the vertebrae between the
cervical and sacral regions. It prevents hyperextension of the vertebrae
and is often involved in “whiplash” accidents.
• Posterior longitudinal ligament connects the posterior surfaces of the
vertebral bodies and is located in the vertebral canal. It limits flexion of
the vertebral column. This ligament causes the herniation of a disk to be
positioned posterolaterally.
Intervertebral foramen
The intervertebral foramina are formed by successive intervertebral notches and
provide for the passage of the spinal nerve. The boundaries of the foramina are:
• Anterior: bodies of the vertebrae and intervertebral disks
• Posterior: zygapophyseal joint and articular processes
• Superior and inferior: pedicles of the vertebrae
2
CHAPTER 1 | BACk AND AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
Herniated Disk
The nucleus pulposus may herniate through the annulus fibrosus. The herniated
nucleus pulposus may compress the spinal nerve roots, resulting in pain along the
involved spinal nerve (sciatica).
• Herniation usually occurs in the lower lumbar (L4/L5 or L5/S1) or lower
cervical (C5/C6 or C6/C7) parts of the vertebral column.
• The herniated disk will usually compress the spinal nerve roots one
number below the involved disk (e.g., the herniation of the L4 disk will
compress the L5 roots, or herniation of the C7 disk will compress the C8
nerve roots).
4th lumbar
Nucleus spinal nerve
pulposus
L4
Herniation of the Compresses
L4 nucleus pulposus roots of 5th lumbar
into vertebral canal spinal nerve
L5
S1
Figure II 1Fig4u.re HernIIiate1d 4. HerniateIdnterverteIbnrtaelrvertebral DDisiksk
SPINAL MENINGES
The spinal cord is protected and covered by 3 connective tissue layers within the
vertebral canal: the dura mater, arachnoid, and pia mater.
2
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Epidural space
Vertebral body
Pia mater
Arachnoid mater Epidural fat
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Dura mater
Subarachnoid
Ventral root of space
spinal nerve
Physiology MedicalGenetics Spinal
nerve
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Intervertebral
foramen
Dorsal root of Denticulate
spinal nerve ligament
Microbiology
Internal vertebral venous plexus
Figure FigurIeI 1 II5.1 C5.rosCsross SSeeccttiioonn of VeorftebraVlertebralCanal Canal
Dura Mater
The dura mater is a tough, cylindrical covering of connective tissue forming a
dural sac which envelops the entire spinal cord and cauda equina.
• The dura mater and dural sac terminate inferiorly at the second sacral
vertebra level.
• Superiorly, the dura mater continues through the foramen magnum and is
continuous with the meningeal layer of the cranial dura.
Arachnoid
The arachnoid is a delicate membrane which completely lines the inner surface of
the dura mater and dural sac. It continues inferiorly and terminates at the second
sacral vertebra.
Pia Mater
The pia mater is tightly attached to the surface of the spinal cord and provides a
delicate covering of the cord.
• The spinal cord, with its covering of pia mater, terminates at the L1 or L2
vertebral levels in the adult.
• There are 2 specializations of the pia mater that are attached to the spinal
cord:
– The denticulate ligaments are bilateral thickenings of pia mater that
run continuously on the lateral sides of the midpoint of the cord. They
separate the ventral and dorsal roots of the spinal nerves and anchor to
the dura mater.
2
CHAPTER 1 | BACk AND AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
– The filum terminale is a continuation of the pia mater distal to the
lower end of the spinal cord. The filum terminale is part of the cauda
equina which is composed of ventral and dorsal roots of lumbar and
sacral nerves that extend below the inferior limit of the spinal cord.
There are 2 spaces related to the meninges. The epidural space is located between CLINICAL CORRELATE
the inner walls of the vertebral canal and the dura mater. It contains fat and the
The internal vertebral venous plexus is
internal vertebral venous plexus. The venous plexus runs the entire length of the
epidural space and continues superiorly through the foramen magnum to connect valveless and connects with veins of the
with dural venous sinuses in the cranial cavity. pelvis, abdomen, and thorax. It provides a
route of metastasis of cancer cells to the
The subarachnoid space is a pressurized space located between the arachnoid and
vertebral column and the cranial cavity.
pia mater layers. It contains cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), which bathes the spinal
cord and spinal nerve roots within the dural sac, and terminates at the second
sacral vertebral level.
There are 2 important vertebral levels. The L1 or L2 vertebrae is the inferior limit
of the spinal cord in adults (conus medullaris). S2 vertebra is the inferior limit of
the dural sac and the subarachnoid space (cerebrospinal fluid).
Epidural anesthesia Lumbar puncture
Thoracic
vertebrae Pia mater Skin
Lamina
Fascia
L2 vertebra
Epidural space
Ligamentum flavum
Lumbar
Conus medullaris End of dural sac
vertebrae
Subarachnoid space
Arachnoid
containing CSF
S2 vertebra
S1S2S3S4S5
Dura mater
Sacrum L1 L2 L3 L4 L5
Sacrum
Epidural space Coccyx
Coccyx
A B Filum terminale (Pia mater)
Figure II 1 6. Important Vertebral Levels
Figure II 1 6. Important Vertebral Levels
SPINAL NERVES
There are 31 pairs of spinal nerves attached to each segment of the spinal cord: 8
cervical, 12 thoracic, 5 lumbar, 5 sacral, and 1 coccygeal. The spinal nerves with
the cranial nerves form part of the peripheral nervous system.
2
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Dorsal ramus
(mixed) Supplies:
Arachnoid • Skin of back and
Pharmacology DBiuorcahemistrymater dorsal neck
White matter
• Deep intrinsic back
Gray matter Pia mater muscles (Erector
spinae)
Dorsal root
(sensory) Dorsal root
Physiology MedicalGenetics
ganglion
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Ventral root (motor)
Spinal nerve (mixed) Supplies:
Microbiology
Ventral ramus
• Skin of anterolateral
(mixed)
trunk and limbs
• Skeletal muscles of
anterolateral trunk and
Sympathetic
limbs
ganglion
Figure II 1 7. Cross SeFcitgiuorne II 1of7.SpCinraolss SectCioonrd ofanSdpinal PartCsord aonfd Spinal Nerve
Parts of Spinal Nerve
Each spinal nerve is formed by the following components:
• Dorsal root carries sensory fibers from the periphery into the dorsal
aspect of the spinal cord; on each dorsal root there is a dorsal root
ganglion (sensory) containing the pseudounipolar cell bodies of the nerve
fibers that are found in the dorsal root
• Ventral root arises from the ventral aspect of the spinal cord and carries
axons of motor neurons from the spinal cord to the periphery; the cell
bodies of the axons in the ventral root are located in the ventral or lateral
horns of the spinal cord gray matter
• Spinal nerve is formed by the union of the ventral and dorsal roots;
it exits the vertebral column by passing through the intervertebral
foramen
• Dorsal rami innervate the skin of the dorsal surface of the back, neck,
zygapophyseal joints, and intrinsic skeletal muscles of the deep back
• Ventral rami innervate the skin of the anterolateral trunk and limbs, and
the skeletal muscles of the anterolateral trunk and limbs (ventral rami
form the brachial and lumbosacral plexuses)
2
CHAPTER 1 | BACk AND AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
The spinal nerves exit the vertebral column by a specific relationship to the
vertebrae. The cervical nerves C1–C7 exit the intervertebral foramina superior to
the pedicles of the same numbered vertebrae. The C8 nerve exits the intervertebral
foramen inferior to the C7 pedicle. This is the transition point. All nerves
beginning with T1 and below will exit the intervertebral foramina inferior to the
pedicle of the same numbered vertebrae.
Lumbar Puncture
A lumbar puncture is used to inject anesthetic material in the epidural space or to
withdraw CSF from the subarachnoid space.
• A spinal tap is typically performed at the L4 L5 interspace.
• A horizontal line drawn at the top of the iliac crest marks the level of the
L4 vertebra.
• When a lumbar puncture is performed in the midline, the needle passes
through the interlaminar space of the vertebral column found between
the laminae of the lumbar vertebrae.
• The interlaminar spaces are covered by the highly elastic ligamenta flava.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
During a lumbar puncture, a needle is
passed through the interlaminar space while
the vertebral column is flexed. The needle
passes through the following layers:
Lumbar vertebrae • Skin
Interlaminar spaces • Superficial fascia
(covered by
• Deep fascia
ligamentum flavum)
• Supraspinous ligament
• Interspinous ligament
Sacrum
• Interlaminar space
Coccyx • Epidural space
• Dura
Figure II 1 8. Interlaminar Spaces
Figure II 1 8. Interlaminar Spaces • Arachnoid
• Subarachnoid space
2
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
The autonomic nervous system (ANS) is concerned with the motor innervation of
smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, and glands of the body. Anatomically and
functionally, it is composed of 2 motor divisions: sympathetic
Pharmacology Biochemistry
and parasympathetic. In both divisions, 2 neurons form an autonomic pathway.
• Preganglionic neurons have their neuronal cell bodies in the CNS
(formed by neuroectoderm); their axons exit in cranial and spinal nerves.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
• Postganglionic neurons have cell bodies in autonomic ganglia in the
peripheral nervous system (PNS) (formed by neural crest cells)
Central nervous
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Motor ganglion
system (CNS)
Preganglionic Postganglionic
nerve fiber nerve fiber
Target
Microbiology
Figure II 1 9. Autonomic Nervous System
Figure II 1 9. Autonomic Nervous System
Sympathetic Nervous System
The preganglionic cell bodies of the sympathetic nervous system are found in the
lateral horn gray matter of spinal cord segments T1–L2 (14 segments).
The postganglionic cell bodies of the sympathetic system are found in one of 2
types of motor ganglia in the PNS:
• Chain or paravertebral
• Collateral or prevertebral (found only in abdomen or pelvis)
Table II 1 1. Sympathetic = Thoracolumbar Outflow
Origin (Preganglionic) Site of Synapse (Postganglionic) Innervation (Target)
Spinal cord levels T1–L2 Sympathetic chain ganglia Smooth muscle, cardiac
(paravertebral ganglia) muscle and glands of
body wall and limbs
(T1–L2), head (T1–2) and
thoracic viscera (T1–5)
Thoracic splanchnic nerves Prevertebral ganglia (collateral) Smooth muscle and
T5–T12 (e.g., celiac, aorticorenal, glands of the foregut and
superior mesenteric ganglia) midgut
Lumbar splanchnic nerves Prevertebral ganglia (collateral) Smooth muscle and
L1–L2 (e.g., inferior mesenteric and glands of the pelvic
pelvic ganglia) viscera and hindgut
3
CHAPTER 1 | BACk AND AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
III Head
IV (sweat glands, dilator pupillae m.,
V superior tarsal m.)
VII VI m: muscle
VIII Internal carotid a. a: artery
IX External carotid a.
X
XI X (Periarterial carotid nerve plexus)
C1
Superior cervical ganglion
Lesions at arrows result in
ipsilateral Horner syndrome (ptosis,
Middle cervical ganglion
miosis, and anhydrosis).
T1 Cervicothoracic ganglion
Heart, trachea,
bronchi, lungs (thorax)
Smooth muscle
and glands of
the foregut
and midgut
*
Thoracic *Gray rami carry postganglionic
* Prevertebral sympathetic axons from the sympathetic
Splanchnic
ganglia ganglion to the spinal nerve.
* nerves
(T5–T12)
Lumbar
splanchnic nerves (L1 L2)
L1 Smooth muscle
and glands of
L2 the hindgut
and pelvic viscera
Prevertebral
ganglia
Sympathetic
chain
Preganglionic
Postganglionic
Figure II 1Fig1u0r.e OIIver1view10. Overviewof SyomfpaSthyemtipcathetic OuOtufltoflwow
3
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Preganglionic
Postganglionic
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Lateral horn (T1 –L2 )
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Dorsal ramus
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Ventral ramus To smooth
muscles and
glands of body
Spinal nerve
wall and limbs
White ramus
Gray ramus
Microbiology
communicans–preganglionics (14)
communicans–postganglionics (31)
(to body wall)
Sympathetic chain ganglion
Figure II 1 11. Cross Section of Spinal Cord Showing Sympathetic Outflow
Figure II 1 11. Cross Section of Spinal Cord Showing Sympathetic Outflow
Parasympathetic Nervous System
NOTE
The preganglionic cell bodies of the parasympathetic nervous system are found in
White rami are preganglionic sympathetics
the CNS in one of 2 places:
that all enter the sympathetic trunk of
ganglia. They may synapse with ganglion at • Gray matter of brain stem associated with cranial nerves III, VII, IX,
and X, or
point of entry or go up or down and synapse
above or below point of entry. Ifa white • Spinal cord gray in sacral segments S2 3, and 4 (pelvic splanchnics)
ramus does not synapse, it passes through
The postganglionic cell bodies of the parasympathetic nervous system are found
ganglion and becomes a root of a thoracic or
in terminal ganglia in the PNS that are usually located near the organ innervated
lumbar splanchnic nerve. or in the wall of the organ.
Table II 1 2. Parasympathetic = Craniosacral Outflow
Origin (Preganglionic) Site of Synapse (Postganglionic) Innervation (Target)
Cranial nerves III, VII, IX 4 cranial ganglia Glands and smooth
muscle of the head
Cranial nerve X Terminal ganglia (in or near the Viscera of the neck, thorax,
walls of viscera) foregut, and midgut
Pelvic splanchnic nerves Terminal ganglia (in or near the Hindgut and pelvic
S 2, 3, 4 walls of viscera) viscera (including the
bladder, rectum, and
erectile tissue)
3
CHAPTER 1 | BACk AND AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
Parasympathetic Nervous System
Ciliary
ganglion
Pupillary sphincter III
Ciliary m. Submandibular
Midbrain
ganglion
Submandibular gland
V
Sublingual gland Pterygopalatine Pons
Head ganglion VII
Lacrimal gland
Nasal and oral IX
mucosal glands
X Medulla
Parotid gland Otic
ganglion C1
Viscera of the
Terminal
thorax and abdomen
ganglia
(foregut and midgut)
T1
Preganglionic
Postganglionic
L1
Terminal ganglia
Hindgut and pelvic viscera
(including the bladder, erectile
tissue, and rectum)
S2
S3
Pelvic S4
splanchnics
Figure FigIuIre1 1II2.1 1O2v.ervOievwerview ofofParaPsayrmaspyamthpeattihcetic Outflow Outflow
3

2#
Thorax
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Solve problems concerning the chest wall
❏ Use knowledge of embryology of lower respiratory system
❏ Use knowledge of pleura and pleural cavity
❏ Interpret scenarios on respiratory histology
❏ Use knowledge of alveolar ducts, alveolar sacs, and the alveoli
❏ Answer questions about embryology of the heart
❏ Solve problems concerning the mediastinum
❏ Interpret scenarios on heart histology
❏ Solve problems concerning the diaphragm
CHEST WALL CLINICAL CORRELATE
The presence of a tumor within the breast
Breast can distort Cooper ligaments, which results
in dimpling of the skin (orange peel
The breast (mammary gland) is a subcutaneous glandular organ of the superficial
pectoral region. It is a modified sweat gland, specialized in women for the produc appearance).
tion and secretion of milk. A variable amount of fat surrounds the glandular tissue
and duct system and is responsible for the shape and size of the female breast.
• Cooper ligaments are suspensory ligaments that attach the mammary CLINICAL CORRELATE
gland to the skin and run from the skin to the deep fascia.
During a radical mastectomy, the long
• There is an extensive blood supply to the mammary tissues. The 2
thoracic nerve (serratus anterior muscle) may
prominent blood supplies are:
be lesioned during ligation of the lateral
– Internal thoracic artery (internal mammary), a branch of the subcla thoracic artery.
vian artery which supplies medial aspect of the gland
Afew weeks after surgery, the patient may
– Lateral thoracic artery, a branch of the axillary artery which contrib
present with a winged scapula and weakness
utes to the blood supply to lateral part of the gland; lateral aspect of the
chest wall, the lateral thoracic artery courses with the long thoracic in abduction of the arm above 90°. The
nerve, superficial to serratus anterior muscle thoracodorsal nerve supplying the latissimus
dorsi muscle may also be damaged during
mastectomy, resulting in weakness in extension
and medial rotation of the arm.
3
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
• The lymphatic drainage of the breast is critical due to its important role
in metastasis of breast cancer. The lymphatic drainage of the breast follows
2 primary routes:
– Laterally, most of the lymphatic flow (75%) drains from the nipple and
Pharmacology Biochemistry
the superior, lateral, and inferior quadrants of the breast to the axillary
nodes, initially to the pectoral group.
– From the medial quadrant, most lymph drains to the parasternal nodes,
which accompany the internal thoracic vessels. It is also through this
Physiology MedicalGenetics
medial route that cancer can spread to the opposite breast.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Subclavian nodes
(Parasternal)
Interpectoral nodes Sagittal View of Breast
internal thoracic
nodes Axillary nodes
Microbiology
Subcutaneous fat
Suspensory
ligaments (Cooper)
Brachial nodes
Gland lobules
Subscapular nodes
Lactiferous duct
Lactiferous sinus
Pectoral nodes
Figure II 2 1. Breast
Figure II 2 1. Breast
EMBRYOLOGY OF LOWER RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
During week 4 of development, the lower respiratory system (trachea, bronchi,
and lungs) begins to develop as a single respiratory (laryngotracheal)
diverticulum of endoderm from the ventral wall of the foregut. The respiratory
epithelium develops from endoderm while the muscles, connective tissues, and
cartilages develop from mesoderm.
• The respiratory diverticulum enlarges distally to form the lung bud.
• The diverticulum and lung bud then bifurcate into the 2 bronchial buds,
which then undergo a series of divisions to form the major part of the
bronchial tree (main, secondary, and tertiary bronchi) by month 6.
• The tertiary segmental bronchi are related to the bronchopulmonary
segments of the lungs.
3
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
• To separate the initial communication with foregut, the tracheoesopha
geal septum forms to separate the esophagus from the trachea.
• A critical time in lung development is the 25–28th weeks. By this time,
the Type I and II pneumocytes are present and gas exchange and sur
factant production are possible. Premature fetuses born during this time
can survive with intensive care. The amount of surfactant production is
critical.
Tracheoesophageal septum
Foregut Esophagus
Respiratory
diverticulum
Trachea
Lung bud
Esophagus
Bronchial
buds
FigureFigure IIII22 22.. DDeveveleoloppmmenentt of the oLfowethre ResLpoirwateorry RSesypsitreamtory System
A tracheoesophageal fistula is an abnormal communication between the trachea
and esophagus caused by a malformation of the tracheoesophageal septum. It
is generally associated with the following:
• Esophageal atresia and polyhydramnios (increased volume of amniotic
fluid)
• Regurgitation of milk
• Gagging and cyanosis after feeding
• Abdominal distention after crying
• Reflux of gastric contents into lungs causing pneumonitis
The fistula is most commonly (90% of cases) located between the esophagus
and distal third of the trachea.
3
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Pulmonary hypoplasia occurs when lung
Trachea
development is stunted. This condition has 2
Pharmacologcyongenital causes: Biochemistry
Tracheoesophageal
• Congenital diaphragmatic hernia fistula
Esophagus
(a herniation of abdominal contents
into the thorax, which affects
Physiology MedicalGenetics
development of the left lung)
Bronchi
• Bilateral renal agenesis (this causes
oligohydramnios, which increases
Pathology pressure on fetal BtheohraavxioralScaienndce/SoPcoitatlerS’csiences
sequence [one feature of Potter’s Gastric acids
sequence is bilateral pulmonary
hypoplasia])
Figure II F2igure3. TIrIach2eoe3s.opTharagcehaeloesophageal FiFsitsutluala (Most(MostCommonCommToynpe) Type)
Microbiology
ADULT THORACIC CAVITY
The thoracic cavity is kidney shaped on cross section and is bounded anterolater
ally by the bony thorax (sternum, ribs, and intercostal spaces) and posteriorly by
the thoracic vertebrae. Superiorly, the thoracic cavity communicates through the
thoracic inlet with the base of the neck. (Note, however, that clinically this region is
usually called the thoracic outlet.) Inferiorly, the thoracic outlet is closed by the
diaphragm which separates the thoracic from the abdominal cavity.
The thoracic cavity is divided into 2 lateral compartments: the lungs and their
covering of serous membranes, and a central compartment called the
mediastinum which contains most of the viscera of the thorax.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Intercostal Spaces
Passage of instruments through the
• There are 11 intercostal spaces within the thoracic wall (Figure II 2 4A).
intercostal space is done in the lower part
The spaces are filled in by 3 layers of intercostal muscles and their related
of the space to avoid the intercostal fasciae and are bounded superiorly and inferiorly by the adjacent ribs.
neurovascular structures (as during a
• The costal groove is located along the inferior border of each rib (upper
thoracentesis). aspect of the intercostal space) and provides protection for the intercostal
nerve, artery, and vein which are located in the groove. The vein is most
An intercostal nerve block is done in the
superior and the nerve is inferior in the groove (VAN).
upper portion of the intercostal space.
• The intercostal arteries are contributed to anteriorly from branches of the
internal thoracic artery (branch of the subclavian artery) and posteriorly
from branches of the thoracic aorta. Thus, the intercostal arteries can
provide a potential collateral circulation between the subclavian artery
and the thoracic aorta.
3
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
First rib
Sternum
Clavicle
Anterior
Posterior
Second rib
mediastinum
mediastinum
Rib Scapula
2 Middle
Manubrium of mediastinum
sternum
Esophagus
Rib Sternal angle
Left lung
6 (of Louis)
Rib Right lung
T12
8
Body of sternum Thoracic Descending
vertebra aorta
Costochondral
junction
A. Thoracic Wall B. (Transverse section) thoracic cavity
Figure II 2 4. Thoracic Cavity
Figure II 2 4. Thoracic Cavity
PLEURA AND PLEURAL CAVITY CLINICAL CORRELATE
Within the thoracic and abdominal cavities there are 3 serous mesodermal derived Respiratory distress syndrome is caused
membranes which form a covering for the lungs (pleura), heart (pericardium), by a deficiency of surfactant (type II
and abdominal viscera (peritoneum). pneumocytes). This condition is associated
with premature infants, infants of diabetic
Each of these double layered membranes permits friction reducing movements of
mothers, and prolonged intrauterine
the viscera against adjacent structures.
asphyxia. Thyroxine and cortisol treatment
The outer layer of the serous membranes is referred to as the parietal layer; and
increase the production of surfactant.
the inner layer which is applied directly to the surface of the organ is called
the visceral layer. The 2 layers are continuous and there is a potential space Surfactant deficiency may lead to hyaline
(pleural cavity) between the parietal and visceral layers containing a thin layer of membrane disease, whereby repeated
serous fluid.
gasping inhalations damage the alveolar
lining. Hyaline membrane disease is
characterized histologically by collapsed
Pleura
alveoli (atelectasis) and eosinophilic (pink)
The pleura is the serous membrane that invests the lungs in the lateral compart
fluid covering the alveoli.
ments of the thoracic cavity (Figure II 2 5). The external parietal pleura lines and
attaches to the inner surfaces of the chest wall, diaphragm, and mediastinum. The
innermost visceral layer reflects from the parietal layer at the hilum of the lungs
and is firmly attached to and follows the contours of the lung. Visceral and parietal
pleura are continuous at the root of the lung.
The parietal pleura is regionally named by its relationship to the thoracic wall and
mediastinum (Figure II 2 5):
• Costal parietal pleura is lateral and lines the inner surfaces of the ribs
and intercostal spaces
• Diaphragmatic parietal pleura lines the thoracic surface of the dia
phragm
3
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
• Mediastinal parietal pleura is medial and lines the mediastinum. The
mediastinal pleura reflects and becomes continuous with the visceral
pleura at the hilum.
• Cervical parietal pleura extends into the neck above the first rib where it
Pharmacology Biochemistry
covers the apex of the lung.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
The visceral pleura tightly invests the surface of the lungs, following all of the
Inflammation of the parietal pleural layers
fissures and lobes of the lung.
(pleurisy) produces sharp pain upon
Physiology MedicalGenetics
respiration. Costal inflammation produces
local dermatome pain of the chest wall via Innervation of Pleura
the intercostal nerves; whereby mediastinal The parietal pleura has extensive somatic sensory innervation provided by nerves
irritation produces referred pain via the closely related to different aspects of the pleura.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
phrenic nerve to the shoulder dermatomes
• The intercostal nerves supply the costal and peripheral portions of the
of C3–5.
diaphragmatic pleura.
• The phrenic nerve supplies the central portion of the diaphragmatic
Microbiology pleura and the mediastinal pleura.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Open pneumothorax occurs when air enters The visceral pleura is supplied by visceral sensory nerves that course with the
autonomic nerves.
the pleural cavity following a penetrating
wound of the chest cavity. Air moves freely
through the wound during inspiration and
Cervical pleura
expiration.
• During inspiration, air enters the chest
wall and the mediastinum will shift
toward other side and compress the Hilum
Costal pleura
opposite lung. Lung
Parietal pleura
• During expiration, air exits the wound
Mediastinal
and the mediastinum moves back pleura Visceral pleura
toward the affected side.
Pleural cavity
Tension pneumothorax occurs when a piece
of tissue covers and forms a flap over the
Diaphragm
8th rib
wound.
Diaphragmatic pleur
• During inspiration, air enters the chest Costodiaphragmatic recess
cavity, which results in a shift of the
10th rib
mediastinum toward the other side,
compressing the opposite lung.
• During expiration, the piece of tissue Figure II 2 5. Layers of the Pleura
Figure II 2 5. Layers of the Pleura
prevents the air from escaping the
wound, which increases the pressure
and the shift toward the opposite side The pleural cavity is the potential space between the parietal and visceral layers of
the pleura. It is a closed space which contains a small amount of serous fluid that
is enhanced. This severely reduces the
lubricates the opposing parietal and visceral layers.
opposite lung function and venous
return to the heart and can be life The introduction of air into the pleural cavity may cause the lung to collapse,
threatening. resulting in a pneumothorax which causes shortness of breath and painful
respiration. The lung collapses due to the loss of the negative pressure of the
pleural cavity during a pneumothorax.
40
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
Pleural Reflections
Pleural reflections are the areas where the parietal pleura abruptly changes
direction from one wall to the other, outlining the extent of the pleural cavities.
• The sternal line of reflection is where the costal pleura is continuous with
the mediastinal pleura posterior to the sternum (from costal cartilages
2–4). The pleural margin then passes inferiorly to the level of the sixth
costal cartilage.
• Around the chest wall, there are 2 rib interspaces separating the inferior
limit of parietal pleural reflections from the inferior border of the lungs
and visceral pleura: between ribs 6–8 in the midclavicular line, ribs 8–10
in the midaxillary line, and ribs 10–12 at the vertebral column
(paravertebral line), respectively.
Costomediastinal
recesses
Midclavicular line Paravertebral Midaxillary
line line
Rib 8 Rib 8
Rib 10
Rib 10
Costodiaphragmatic Costodiaphragmatic Costodiaphragmatic
recesses recesses recesses
Anterior View Posterior View Lateral View
Figure II 2 6. Pleural Reflections and Recesses
Figure II 2 6. Pleural Reflections and Recesses
Pleural Recesses NOTE
Pleural recesses are potential spaces not occupied by lung tissue except during
deep inspiration.
Visceral Parietal
• Costodiaphragmatic recesses are spaces below the inferior borders of the
Pleura Pleura
lungs where costal and diaphragmatic pleura are in contact.
Midclavicular line 6th rib 8th rib
• The costomediastinal recess is a space where the left costal and mediasti
nal parietal pleura meet, leaving a space caused by the cardiac notch of the Midaxillary line 8th rib 10th rib
left lung. This space is occupied by the lingula of the left lung during
inspiration. Paravertebral line 10th rib 12th rib
4
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
LUNGS
The lungs and the pleural membranes are located in the lateral compartment of the
thoracic cavity. The lungs are separated from each other in the midline by the
mediastinum. The hilum of the lung is on the medial surface and serves for
Pharmacology Biochemistry
passage of structures in the root of the lung: the pulmonary vessels, primary
bronchi, nerves, and lymphatics.
Physiology MedicalGenetics Surfaces and Regions
Each lung has 3 surfaces:
• The costal surface is smooth and convex and is related laterally to the ribs
and tissues of the chest wall.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
• The mediastinal surface is concave and is related medially to the middle
mediastinum and the heart. The mediastinal surfaces contain the root of
the lung and a deep cardiac impression, more pronounced on the left
lung.
Microbiology
• The diaphragmatic surface (base) is concave and rests on the superior
surface of the diaphragm. It is more superior on the right owing to the
presence of the liver.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Apex
Atumor at the apex of the lung (Pancoast
tumor) may result in thoracic outlet
syndrome.
Hilum Costal surface
Lung
Mediastinal
surface
Diaphragm
8th rib
Diaphragmatic
Costodiaphragmatic recess surfac
10th rib
Figure II 2 7. Surfaces of the Lung
Figure II 2 7. Surfaces of the Lung
The apex (cupola) of the lung projects superiorly into the root of the neck above the
level of the first rib and is crossed anteriorly by the subclavian artery and vein.
Lobes and Fissures
The right lung is divided into 3 lobes (superior, middle, inferior) separated by 2
fissures, the horizontal and oblique fissures. The horizontal fissure separates the
superior from the middle lobe and the oblique fissure separates the middle from
the inferior lobe.
42
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
The left lung is divided into 2 lobes (superior, inferior) separated by an oblique CLINICAL CORRELATE
fissure. The lingula of the upper lobe of the left lung corresponds to the middle
The superior lobe of the right lung projects
lobe of the right lung.
anteriorly on the chest wall above the 4th
• The oblique fissure of both lungs projects anteriorly at approximately the rib and the middle lobe projects anteriorly
5th intercostal space in the midclavicular line, ending medially deep to below the 4th rib.
the 6th costal cartilage.
Asmall portion of the inferior lobe of both
• The horizontal fissure runs horizontally from the oblique fissure in the
lungs projects below the 6th rib anteriorly
right 5th intercostal space to the right 4th costal cartilage.
but primarily projects to the posterior chest
wall.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
• To listen to breath sounds of the
superior lobes of the right and left
lungs, the stethoscope is placed on
the superior area of the anterior chest
wall (above the 4th rib for the right
Horizontal Trachea lung).
fissure
• For breath sounds from the middle
lobe of the right lung, the
Right lung Left lung
stethoscope is placed on the anterior
Superior lobe Superior lobe chest wall inferior to the 4th rib and
Middle lobe Oblique fissure medially toward the sternum.
Oblique fissure Inferior lobe
• For the inferior lobes of both lungs,
Inferior lobe
breath sounds are primarily heard on
the posterior chest wall.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Diaphragm Mediastinum
Aspiration of a foreign body will more often
enter the right primary bronchus, which is
shorter, wider, and more vertical than the left
primary bronchus. When the individual is
vertical, the foreign body usually falls into
Figure FigIuIre2 8II. 2Lo8b.esLobes anadnd FFisisssuureress of Luonfgs Lungs
the posterior basal segment of the right
inferior lobe.
Lymphatic System
The lymphatic system consists of an extensive network of lymph capillaries,
vessels, and nodes that drain extracellular fluid from most of the body tissues and
organs. The lymph flow will return to the blood venous system by 2 major lym
phatic vessels, the right lymphatic duct and the thoracic duct on the left (Figure
II 2 10A). These 2 vessels drain into the junction of the internal jugular and the
subclavian veins on their respective sides.
4
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
• The thoracic duct carries all lymphatic drainage from the body below the
diaphragm and on the left side of the trunk and head above the diaphragm
(Figure II 2 10B).
• The right lymphatic duct drains lymph flow from the right head and neck
Pharmacology Biochemistry
and the right side of the trunk above the diaphragm (Figure II 2 10B).
Lymphatic Drainage
Physiology MedicalGenetics
The lymphatic drainage of the lungs is extensive and drains by way of superficial
and deep lymphatic plexuses. The superficial plexus is immediately deep to the
visceral pleura. The deep plexus begins deeply in the lungs and drains through
pulmonary nodes which follow the bronchial tree toward the hilum.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
The major nodes involved in the lymphatic drainage of these 2 plexuses are:
• Bronchopulmonary (hilar) nodes are located at the hilum of the lungs.
They receive lymph drainage from both superficial and deep lymphatic
plexuses, and they drain into the tracheobronchial nodes.
Microbiology
• Tracheobronchial nodes are located at the bifurcation of the trachea, and
they drain into the right and left bronchomediastinal nodes and trunk.
• Bronchomediastinal nodes and trunk are located on the right and left
sides of the trachea, and they drain superiorly into either the right
lymphatic duct or the thoracic duct on the left.
Right Lung Left Lung
CLINICAL CORRELATE
The lymphatic drainage from the lower lobe
To right lymphatic Trachea To thoracic duct
of the left lung also drains across the duct
midline into the right bronchomediastinal
lymphatic trunk and nodes, then continues Bronchomediastinal
nodes Tracheobronchial
along the right pathway to the right
nodes
lymphatic duct. This is important to consider Tracheobronchial
Bronchopulmonary
with metastasis of lung cancer. nodes nodes
Bronchopulmonary
nodes
Diaphragm
Figure FigureII 2II 29.9.LyLmymphpahtaictiscs of thoef Ltuhnegs Lungs
4
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
From head
Area draining Area draining
and neck to right to thoracic duct
Left internal lymphatic
Right lymphatic duct Thoracic jugular vein duct
duct
From upper
From upper limb & neck limb and neck
Left subclavian
vein
Right bronchomediastinal trunk
Left bronchomediastinal trunk
A. Right lymphatic and thoracic ducts B. General lymphatic drainage
Figure II 2 F1i0g.ureLymphaticII 2Dr1a0in.age
RESPIRATORY HISTOLOGY
CLINICAL CORRELATE
The lung is an organ that functions in the intake of oxygen and exhaling of
CO2. Approximately 14 times each minute, we take in about 500 mL of air per Any disease that affects capillaries also
breath. Inspired air will be spread over 120 square meters of the surface area of the affects the extensive capillary bed of the
lungs. The air–blood barrier has to be thin enough for air to pass across but tough
lungs. Bacteria which colonize the lungs may
enough to keep the blood cells inside their capillaries.
damage the barriers between the alveoli and
Because lungs are opened to the outside world, they are susceptible to environ the capillaries, gaining access to the
mental insults in the form of pollution and infectious bacteria. bloodstream (a common complication of
bacterial pneumonia).
The lungs receive the entire cardiac output and are positioned to modify various
blood components. The pulmonary endothelium plays an active role in the • With allergies, smooth muscle
metabolic transformation of lipoproteins and prostaglandins. The
constriction reduces the diameter of
enzyme that converts angiotensin I to angiotensin II is produced by the lung
air tubes and results in reduced air
endothelial cells.
intake.
• Lung cancers commonly develop from
bronchi (smoking, asbestos, and
excessive radiation are the main
causes).
• Mesothelioma is a malignant tumor of
the pleura (causative agent: asbestos
dust).
4
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Paranasal
sinuses
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Frontal
sinus
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Olfactory Sphenoid
area sinus
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Pharyngeal
tonsil
Nasal
conchae
Nasopharynx
Microbiology
Oropharynx
Larynx
Laryngopharynx
Trachea
Figure Figure II I2I 211.11. RReessppiirraattoorryy PathwaPyasthways
Table II 2 1. Histologic Features of Trachea, Bronchi, and Bronchioles
Trachea Bronchi Bronchioles
Epithelia Pseudostratified ciliated PCC to simple Ciliated, some goblet cells, Clara
columnar (PCC) cells, columnar cells cells in terminal bronchioles
goblet cells
Cartilage 16–20 C shaped Irregular plates None
cartilaginous rings
Glands Seromucous glands Fewer seromucous None
glands
Smooth Between open ends of Prominent Highest proportion of smooth
muscle C shaped cartilage muscle in the bronchial tree
Elastic fibers Present Abundant Abundant
4
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
TRACHEA
The trachea is a hollow tube, about 10 cm in length (and about 2 cm in
diameter), extending from the larynx to its bifurcation at the carina to form a
primary bronchus for each lung. The most striking structures of the trachea are the
C shaped hyaline cartilage rings. In the human there are 16–20 of them distrib
uted along the length of the trachea. The rings overlap in the anterior part of the
trachea. The free posterior ends of the C shaped cartilages are interconnected by
smooth muscle cells.
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used with peMrmciGssriaown.CopyrHigihllt Companies. Used with permission.
Figure FigIuIre2 1II2.2 12T.rachTeraachea wwitihth a ahyalihnyealinecartilagecartilagrieng (arrow)ring and(arrow)
and pseudposseturadtoifsiterdatified columcnoalurmnar epitheliumepithelium
The trachea is composed of concentric rings of mucosa, submucosa, an incomplete
muscularis, and an complete adventitia.
• The mucosa has 3 components: a pseudostratified epithelium, an underly
ing vascularized loose connective tissue (lamina propria) that contains
immune cells, and a thin layer of smooth muscle cells (muscularis
mucosa).
• The submucosa is a vascular service area containing large blood vessels.
Collagen fibers, lymphatic vessels and nerves are also present in this layer.
• The outside covering of the trachea, the adventitia, is composed of several
layers of loose connective tissue.
The epithelial lining of the trachea and bronchi is pseudostratified columnar in
which all cells lie on the same basal membrane but only some reach the luminal
surface. The only other place in the body with this epithelium is the male repro
ductive tract.
4
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
CLINICAL CORRELATE
If mucosal clearance is ineffective, or the
mechanism overwhelmed, infection
Pharmacolog(ypathogenic bacteria) or pneumoBciooncihoesmisistry
(dust related disease) may follow.
In cystic fibrosis, the secreted mucous is
thick or viscous and the cilia have a difficult
Physiology MedicalGenetics
time moving it toward the pharynx. Patients
with this disease have frequent infections of
the respiratory system.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permisMsicoGn.rCawopyrightHill Companies. Used with permission.
Microbiology
Figure FiguIrIe 2 I1I3.2 13P.seuPdosesutrdaotisftireadtified Columcnoalurmnar Epitheliumepitheliuwmith Goblet witChells goblet
cells (arrowh(eaardr)owhead) Ssuurrrroouunnddeedd by CilbiaytedciliatCedells (arrocwel)ls (arrow)
CLINICAL CORRELATE Tracheal Epithelial Cell Types
Patients lacking dynein have immotile cilia Columnar cells extend from the basal membrane to the luminal surface. These
cells contain 200–300 apical cilia per cell that are intermingled with microvilli. The
or Kartagener syndrome.
cilia are motile and beat to help move the secreted mucous layer over the lining of
With immotile cilia, patients are subject to the trachea and out of the respiratory system.
many respiratory problems because their
Goblet cells secrete a polysaccharide mucous material into the lumen of tra
cilia cannot move this mucous layer with its
chea. Mucous production is supplemented by secretions of the submucosal mixed
trapped bacteria. Males also possess glands. The mucous layer of the respiratory system traps particulate substances
immotile sperm. (dust, bacteria, and viruses) and absorbs noxious water soluble gases such as
ozone and sulfur dioxide. The mucous sticky layer is moved by the beating cilia
toward the pharynx where it is swallowed. This movement is known as the
mucociliary escalator system. Most material (dust and bacteria) is trapped in the
mucous layer, and is removed and digested.
Pulmonary neuroendocrine (PNE) cells are comparable to the endocrine cells in
the gut. These epithelial neuroendocrine cells have been given various names:
• APUD cells (Amino Precursor Uptake Decarboxylase), DNES cells
(Diffuse Neuro Endocrine System) and K (Kulchitsky) cells. These cells
occur in clusters and are often located at airway branch points.
• Brush cells may represent goblet cells that have secreted their products or
intermediate stages in the formation of goblet or the tall ciliated cells.
They have short microvilli on their apical surfaces. Some of these cells
have synapses with intraepithelial nerves, suggesting that these cells may
be sensory receptors.
4
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
Basal cells are stem cells for the ciliated and goblet cells. The stem cells lie on the CLINICAL CORRELATE
basal membrane but do not extend to the lumen of the trachea. These cells, along
The columnar and goblet cells are sensitive
with the epithelial neuroendocrine cells, are responsible for the pseudostratified
to irritation. The ciliated cells become taller,
appearance of the trachea.
and there is an increase in the number of
goblet cells and submucosal glands.
BRONCHI Intensive irritation from smoking leads to a
squamous metaplasia where the ciliated
The bronchial tree forms a branching airway from the trachea to the bronchi
oles. When the primary bronchi enter the lung, they give rise to 5 secondary or epithelium becomes a squamous
lobar bronchi—3 for the right lung and 2 for the left. The 5 lobes are further epithelium. This process is reversible.
subdivided into 10 tertiary or segmental bronchi in each lung, which form
bronchopulmonary segments.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Bronchial metastatic tumors arise from
Kulchitsky cells.
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used with peMrmcGisrsaiown.CopyrHigilhlt Companies. Used with permission.
Figure FigurIeI 2 II142. 14.BroBnrcohnucshus witwhitha Plaate plaotef Cartilaogfe cartil(aagrreow) (arrow)
The epithelial lining of the bronchi is also pseudostratified. It consists of ciliated
columnar cells, basal cells, mucous cells, brush cells and neuroendocrine
(APUD, DNES, or K) cells. There are also seromucous glands in the submucosa
that empty onto the epithelial surface via ducts. The walls of bronchi contain
irregular plates of cartilage and circular smooth muscle fascicles bound together
by elastic fibers. The number of goblet cells and submucosa glands decreases from
the trachea to the small bronchi.
BRONCHIOLES
CLINICAL CORRELATE
The wall of a bronchiole does not contain cartilage or glands. The smooth muscle
Cystic fibrosis can result in abnormally thick
fascicles are bound together by elastic fibers. The epithelium is still ciliated, but is a
mucous, in part due to defective chloride
simple cuboidal or columnar epithelium rather than pseudostratified. The epithe
transport by Clara cells.
lial lining of the airway is composed of ciliated cells (goblet and basal cells are
absent in the terminal bronchioles) and an additional type called the Clara cell.
4
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Clara cells (also called bronchiolar secretory cells) are nonciliated and secrete a
serous solution similar to surfactant. They aid in the detoxification of airborne
toxins, and serve as a stem cell for the ciliated cells and for themselves. The
number of Clara cells increases in response to increased levels of pollutants like
Pharmacology Biochemistry cigarette smoke. Clara cells are most abundant in the terminal bronchioles,
where they make up about 80% of the epithelial cell lining; they are also
involved with chloride ion transport into the lumens of the terminal bronchioles.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) affects the bronchioles and includes
emphysema and asthma.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
• Emphysema is caused by a loss of
elastic fibers and results in chronic
airflow obstruction.
Microbiology
• Asthma is a chronic process
characterized by a reversible narrowing
of airways.
• Asthma is reversible; emphysema is
not.
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permission.CopMycriGghratw Hill Companies. Used with permission.
FigurFeigureII 2 15I.I T2erm1in5a.l Tebrmroinncahliole lburmonecnhiole(asterisk) lumweinth epith(ealsiutemrisk) containinwgith ceipliitahteedlium cells and
containing ciliated Clarcaellscells and(arrows)Clara cells (arrows)
The terminal bronchiole is the last conducting bronchiole. This bronchiole
is followed by respiratory bronchioles which are periodically interrupted by
alveoli in their walls. The goblet cells are absent from the epithelial lining of the
respiratory bronchioles; however, this epithelium is still lined with a sparse ciliated
cuboidal epithelium which prevents the movement of mucous into the alveoli.
After the last respiratory bronchiole, the wall of the airway disappears and air
enters the alveoli.
ALVEOLAR DUCTS, ALVEOLAR SACS, AND THE ALVEOLI
The alveolar ducts and sacs have little or no walls and consist almost entirely of
alveoli. The alveoli constitute 80–85% of the volume of the normal lung. There are
300 million alveoli in the lungs, each ~200 microns in diameter. The cuboidal
epithelium of the respiratory bronchioles and the alveolar ducts are continuous
with the squamous cells lining the alveoli.
5
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
Alveolar macrophage
Type I cell
Alveolar Alveolus Connective tissue
macrophage
Surfactant
Type II cells
Endothelial cell
Capillary
Red blood cell
Alveolus Type I cell
Basal lamina
Endothelial cell
Capillary
Figure Figure IIII2 2161.6. AAllvveeoolluuss and anBdlood–Aibrlood–aBirarrier barrier
The type I pneumocyte is the major cell lining cell of the alveolar surfaces (also
called small alveolar cell or alveolar type I cell).
• Represent only 40% of the alveolar lining cells, but are spread so thinly
they cover 90–95% of the surface
• Primarily involved in gas exchange
• Post mitotic
The type II pneumocyte is the other major alveolar cell (also called great alveolar
cell [because of its size], granular pneumocyte, septal cell, corner cell, niche cell, or
alveolar type II).
• Constitute 60% of the cell lining the alveoli, but form only 5–10% of the
surface
• Produce and secrete surfactant
• Large, round cells with “myelin figures” in their apical cytoplasm which
represent the remnants of surfactant after histological processing
• Serve as stem cells for themselves and the type I cell
5
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permission.CopMyrcigGhrtaw Hill Companies. Used with permission.
Microbiology
FFiigguurree II 2II17.2 A17lv.eoliAlvweoitlhi Type wiIthPneumtyopceytes I pn(eaurmroowcyhteeasd), Type (aIIrroPwnheeuamd)o,cytes (arrtoywpe), II
pneumocytes and Alve(oalrarrow), Macrophaagned alv(ceuorlavred arrowm)acrophinagethe Alveolar (cuWrvaeldl arrow)
in the alveolar wall.
Surfactant
Surfactant is essential to maintain the normal respiratory mechanics of the
CLINICAL CORRELATE
alveoli. Production of surfactant in the fetus is essential for the survival of the
Corticosteroids induce the fetal synthesis of neonate as it takes its first breath. Surfactant is composed of a mixture of
phospholipids and surfactant proteins whose function is to aid in the spreading of
surfactant. High insulin levels in diabetic
the surfactant at the alveolar air–water interface. The phospholipids act as a
mothers antagonize the effects of
detergent which lowers the surface tension of the alveoli and prevents alveolar
corticosteroids.
collapse during expiration.
Infants of diabetic mothers have a higher
Most surfactant is recycled back to Type II cells for reutilization; some of it
incidence of respiratory distress syndrome.
undergoes phagocytosis by macrophages.
Alveolar Wall
In the alveolar wall under the alveolar epithelium is a rich network of capillaries
arising from pulmonary arteries. The alveolar wall contains a variety of cells and
extracellular fibers. The cells include fibroblasts, macrophages, myofibroblasts,
smooth muscle cells, and occasional mast cells. Type I and II collagens, as well as
elastic fibers, are in the septa. Type I collagen is present primarily in the walls of
the bronchi and bronchioles. Twenty percent of the mass of the lung consists of
collagen and elastic fibers. Elastic fibers are responsible for the stretching and
recoiling activities of the alveoli during respiration. These microscopic elements
are responsible for the recoil of the lungs during expiration.
Gas exchange occurs between capillary blood and alveolar air across the blood–gas
barrier. This barrier consists of surfactant, the squamous Type I pneumocytes, a
shared basal lamina, and capillary endothelium. The distance between the lumen
of the capillary and the lumen of the alveolus can be as thin as 0.1 microns. There
are openings in the wall of most alveoli that form the pores of Kohn. These pores
are thought to be important in collateral ventilation. The diameter of these alveolar
pores can be as large as 10–15 microns.
5
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
Alveolar Macrophages CLINICAL CORRELATE
The alveolar macrophages are derived from monocytes that exit the blood vessels Alveolar macrophages have several other
in the lungs. The resident alveolar macrophages can undergo limited mitoses to names: dust cells because they have
form additional macrophages. These cells can reside in the interalveolar septa as
phagocytosed dust or cigarette particles,
well as in the alveoli. Alveolar macrophages that patrol the alveolar surfaces may
and heart failure cells because they have
pass through the pores of Kohn.
phagocytosed blood cells that have escaped
There are ~1–3 macrophages per alveolus. Alveolar macrophages vary in size, into the alveolar space during congestive
15–40 microns in diameter. These macrophages represent the last defense
heart failure.
mechanism of the lung. Macrophages can pass out of the alveoli to the bronchioles
and enter the lymphatics or become trapped in the moving mucous layer and
propelled toward the pharynx to be swallowed and digested.
EMBRYOLOGY OF THE HEART
Formation of Heart Tube
The heart begins to develop from splanchnic mesoderm in the latter half of week 3
within the cardiogenic area of the cranial end of the embryo. Neural crest cells
migrate into the developing heart and play an important role in cardiac develop
ment. The cardiogenic cells condense to form a pair of primordial heart tubes
which will fuse into a single heart tube during body folding.
• The heart tube undergoes dextral looping (bends to the right) and
rotation.
• The upper truncus arteriosus (ventricular) end of the tube grows more
rapidly and folds downward and ventrally and to the right.
• The atria and sinus venosus lower part of the tube fold upward and
dorsally and to the left. These foldings begin to place the chambers of the
heart in their postnatal anatomic positions.
The primitive heart tube forms 4 dilatations and a cranial outflow tract, the
truncus arteriosus. The fates of these are shown below.
Arterial (outflow)
Truncus
arteriosus
flo Bulbus
Ventral
cordis
Blood
Dorsal
Primitive
ventricle
Atria
Primitive
atrium
Sinus Ventricles
venosus
Venous (Inflow)
Figure II 2 18. Development of the Heart Tube
Figure II 2 18. Development of the Heart Tube
53
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Table II 2 2. Adult Structures Derived From the Dilatations of the Primitive Heart
Embryonic Dilatation Adult Structure
Truncus arteriosus (neural crest) Aorta; Pulmonary trunk; Semilunar values
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Bulbus cordis Smooth part of right ventricle (conus
arteriosus)
Smooth part of left ventricle (aortic vestibule)
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Primitive ventricle Trabeculated part of right ventricle
Trabeculated part of left ventricle
Primitive atrium* Trabeculated part of right atrium (pectinate
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences muscles)
Trabeculated part of left atrium (pectinate
muscles)
Sinus venosus (the only dilation that does Right—Smooth part of right atrium (sinus
Microbiology not become subdivided by a septum) venarum)
Left—Coronary sinus and oblique vein of left
atrium
*The smooth walled part of the left atrium is formed by incorporation of parts of the pulmonary veins into its
wall. The smooth walled part of the right atrium is formed by the incorporation of the right sinus venosus.
Fetal Circulation
There are 3 major venous systems that flow into the sinus venosus end of the heart
tube:
• Vitelline (omphalomesenteric) veins drain deoxygenated blood from the
yolk stalk; they will coalesce and form the veins of the liver (sinusoids,
hepatic portal vein, hepatic vein) and part of the inferior vena cava.
• Umbilical vein carries oxygenated blood from the placenta.
• Cardinal veins carry deoxygenated blood from the body of the embryo;
they will coalesce and contribute to some of the major veins of the body
(brachiocephalic, superior vena cava, inferior vena cava, azygos, renal).
During fetal circulation, oxygenated blood flood from the placenta to the fetus
passes through the umbilical vein. Three vascular shunts develop in the fetal
circulation to bypass blood flow around the liver and lungs:
• The ductus venosus allows oxygenated blood in the umbilical vein to
bypass the sinusoids of the liver into the inferior vena cava and to the right
atrium. From the right atrium, oxygenated blood flows mostly through the
foramen ovale into the left atrium then left ventricle and into the systemic
circulation.
• The foramen ovale develops during atrial septation to allow oxygenated
blood to bypass the pulmonary circulation. Note that this is a right to left
shunting of blood during fetal life.
5
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
• During fetal circulation, the superior vena cava drains deoxygenated blood
from the upper limbs and head into the right atrium. Most of this blood
flow is directed into the right ventricle and into the pulmonary trunk. The
ductus arteriosus opens into the underside of the aorta just distal to the
origin of the left subclavian artery and shunts this deoxygenated blood
from the pulmonary trunk to the aorta to bypass the pulmonary
circulation.
The shunting of blood through the foramen ovale and through the ductus arterio
sus (right to left) during fetal life occurs because of a right to left pressure
gradient.
65% PRESSURE GRADIENTS
Ductus arteriosus Fetal
becomes ligamentum
Superior 3
vena cava arteriosum R → L
40% Left atrium Postnatal
50%
L → R
Foramen ovale
Pulmonary artery
2 becomes
fossa ovalis
Left ventricle
Right atrium
Aorta
Right ventricle
67%
60% 1
Ductus venosus
Inferior
vena cava 26% becomes ligamentum
venosum
Portal vein
26%
Liver
Umbilical vein
80%
becomes ligamentum
From teres of liver
placenta
To
placenta
Right and left umbilical arteries
become medial umbilical ligament
Figure FigureII 2II192. 19.FetFaletal CCiirrccuullaattiioonn and aSnhdunts Shunts
Following birth, these 3 shunts, labelled 1, 2, and 3, will close because of changes
in the pressure gradients and in oxygen tensions. The umbilical vein closes and
reduces blood flow into the right atrium. The ductus venosus also closes. Lung
expansion reduces pulmonary resistance and results in increased flow to the lungs
and increased venous return to the left atrium.
5
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
• Closure of the foramen ovale occurs as a result of the increase in left atrial
pressure and reduction in right atrial pressure.
• Closure of the ductus venosus and ductus arteriosus occurs over the next
several hours as a result of the contraction of smooth muscles in its wall
Pharmacology Biochemistry
and increased oxygen tension.
• The release of bradykinin and the immediate drop of prostaglandin E at
birth also facilitate the closure of the ductus arteriosus.
Physiology MedicalGenetics The changes which occur between pre and postnatal circulation are summarized
below.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Table II 2 3. Adult Vestiges Derived from the Fetal Circulatory System
Changes After Birth Remnant in Adult
Closure of right and left umbilical Medial umbilical ligaments
arteries
Microbiology
Closure of the umbilical vein Ligamentum teres of liver
Closure of ductus venosus Ligamentum venosum
Closure of foramen ovale Fossa ovalis
Closure of ductus arteriosus Ligamentum arteriosum
SEPTATION OF THE HEART TUBE
Except for the sinus venosus of the embryonic heart tube that initially develops
into right and left horns, the ventricular, atrial, and truncus parts of the heart tube,
which are originally a common chamber, will undergo septation into a right and
left heart structure. The septation of the atria and ventricles occurs simultaneously
beginning in week 4 and is mostly finished in week 8. Most of the common
congenital cardiac anomalies result from defects in the formation of these septa.
Atrial Septation
During fetal life, blood is shunted from the right to the left atrium via the foramen
ovale (FO). Note that during fetal circulation, right atrial pressure is higher than
left due to the large bolus of blood directed into the right atrium from the placenta
and to high pulmonary resistance.
The FO has to remain open and functional during the entire fetal life to shunt
oxygenated blood from the right atrium into the left atrium.
5
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
Septum primum (SP)
R L
+ –
Foramen primum (FP)
Endocardial cushions (EC)
(neural crest)
Septum secundum
(SS) (rigid)
SP
Septum primum (SP) (flexible)
Foramen secundum + –
(FS)
EC
SS SP
FS
+ –
FO EC
Foramen
ovale (FO)
– +
Membranous part Interventricular
Muscular part septum
Figure IIFigu2re 20.II 2For2m0.ationFormation ofofAAtrtiraiall SepSteupmtum
Beginning week 4, the common atrium is divided into right and left atria by a
series of events involving 2 septa and 2 foramina.
• The flexible septum primum (SP) grows inferiorly from the roof of the
common atrium toward the endocardial cushions, a centrally located
mass of mesoderm in the developing heart. Initially, the SP does not reach
and fuse with the endocardial cushions. The endocardial cushions form
the right and left atrioventricular canals and contribute to the formation
of the atrioventricular valves, membranous part of the interventricular
septum, and aorticopulmonary septum. Neural crest cells migrate into
the cushions and facilitate their development.
• The foramen primum (FP) is located between the inferior edge of the SP
and the endocardial cushion; it is obliterated when the SP later fuses with
the endocardial cushions.
• The foramen secundum (FS) forms within the upper part of the SP just
before the FP closes to maintain the right to left shunting of oxygenated
blood that entered the right atrium via the inferior vena cava.
5
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
• The rigid septum secundum (SS) forms to the right of the SP from the
roof of the atrium, descends, and partially covers the FS. It does not fuse
with the endocardial cushions.
• The foramen ovale (FO) is the opening between SP and SS.
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Closure of the FO normally occurs immediately after birth; it is caused by
increased left atrial pressure resulting from changes in pulmonary circulation and
decreased right atrial pressure due to the closure of the umbilical vein.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Aorta
Superior
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences vena cava Tricuspid valve
Septum
secundum
Sinus
Limbus
venarum
Pectinate
Microbiology Fossa ovalis
muscles
(septum primum)
Coronary sinus
Inferior vena cava
Figure II 2 21. Postnatal Atrial Septum
Figure II 2 21. Postnatal Atrial Septum
Atrial Septal Defects
Atrial septal defect (ASD) is one of several congenital heart defects. It is more
common in female births than in male. Postnatally, ASDs result in left to right
shunting and are non cyanotic conditions. Two clinically important ASDs are
the secundum and primum types.
• Secundum type ASD is the most common ASD. It is caused by either an
excessive resorption of the SP or an underdevelopment and reduced size of
the SS or both. This ASD results in variable openings between the right
and left atria in the central part of the atrial septum above the limbus. If
the ASD is small, clinical symptoms may be delayed as late as age 30.
NOTE
• Primum type ASD is less common than secundum ASD and results from
Postnatal Shunts a failure of the septum premium to fuse with the endocardial cushions,
and may be combined with defects of the endocardial cushions. Primum
• Right to left shunts are cyanotic
ASDs occur in the lower aspect of the atrial wall, usually with a normal
conditions. formed fossa ovalis. If the endocardial cushion is involved, a primum ASD
can also be associated with a defect of the membranous interventricular
• Left to right shunts are non cyanotic
septum and the atrioventricular valves.
conditions.
5
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
Aorta
Superior
vena cava
Tricuspid valve
Secundum ASD
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Fossa ovalis
Ventricular septal defect (VSD) is the most
Primum ASD common of the congenital heart defects,
and more common in males than in females.
Inferior vena cava
The most common form is a membranous
VSD, associated with the failure of neural
Figure II 2 22. Secundum and Primum Atrial Septal Defect crest cells to migrate into the endocardial
Figure II 2 22. Secundum and Primum Atrial Septal Defect
cushions. Amembranous VSD is caused
by the failure of the membranous
Ventricular Septation interventricular (IV) septum to develop, and
it results in left to right shunting of blood
The development of the interventricular (IV) septum begins in week 4 and is
usually completed by the end of week 7. Unlike atrial septation, the IV septum will through the IV foramen.
develop and close completely by week 8 without any shunting between the
Patients with left to right shunting complain
ventricles.
of excessive fatigue upon exertion. Left to
The adult IV septum consists of 2 parts: a large, muscular component forming right shunting of blood is noncyanotic but
most of the septum and a thin, membranous part forming a small component at
causes increased blood flow and pressure to
the superior aspect of the septum.
the lungs (pulmonary hypertension).
• The muscular IV septum develops in the floor of the ventricle, ascends, Pulmonary hypertension causes marked
and partially separates the right and left ventricles, leaving the IV proliferation of the tunica intima and media
foramen. of pulmonary muscular arteries and
• The membranous IV septum closes the IV foramen. It forms by the arterioles. Ultimately, the pulmonary
fusion of the right conotruncal ridge, the left conotruncal ridge, endocar resistance becomes higher than systemic
dial cushion (neural crest cells are associated with the endocardial
resistance and causes right to left shunting
cushion and conotruncal ridges).
of blood and late cyanosis. At this stage, the
condition is called Eisenmenger complex.
Foramen
ovale
Endocardial
cushion
– + Membranous part Interventri
Interventricular M sep u t s u c m ular – + Muscular part cular septu
foramen
A B
Figure II 2 23. Interventricular Septum
Figure II 2 23. Interventricular Septum
59
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Patent Ductus Arteriosus
A patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) occurs when the ductus arteriosus (a connec
tion between the pulmonary trunk and aorta) fails to close after birth. PDA
Pharmacology Biochemistry is common in premature infants and in cases of maternal rubella infection.
• Postnatally, a PDA causes a left to right shunt (from aorta to pulmonary
trunk) and is non cyanotic. The newborn presents with a machine like
murmur.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
• Normally, the ductus arteriosus closes within a few hours after birth via
smooth muscle contraction to form the ligamentum arteriosum. Prosta
glandin E (PGE) and low oxygen tension sustain patency of the ductus
arteriosus in the fetal period.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
• PGE is used to keep the PDA open in certain heart defects (transposition
of great vessels).
• PGE inhibitor (e.g., indomethacin), acetylcholine, histamine, and catechol
amines promote closure of the ductus arteriosus in a premature birth.
Microbiology
Ligamentum
arteriosum
Patent ductus
arteriosus
Left pulmonary
artery
A. Normal obliterated ductus arteriosus B. Patent ductus arteriosus
Figure II 2 24. Ductus Arteriosus
Figure II 2 24. Ductus Arteriosus
Septation of the Truncus Arteriosus
The septation of the truncus arteriosus occurs during week 8. Neural crest cells
migrate into the conotruncal and bulbar ridges of the truncus arteriosus, which
grow in a spiral fashion and fuse to form the aorticopulmonary (AP)
septum. The AP septum divides the truncus arteriosus into the aorta and
pulmonary trunk.
6
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
Aorta
Aorticopulmonary
Pulmonary
septum
Trunk
RV LV
Figure II 2 25. Formation of the Aorticopulmonary Septum
Figure II 2 25. Formation of the Aorticopulmonary Septum
There are 3 classic cyanotic congenital heart abnormalities that occur with
defects in the development of the aorticopulmonary septum. They are related to
the failure of neural crest cells to migrate into the truncus arteriosus:
• Tetralogy of Fallot (most common) occurs when the AP septum fails to
align properly and shifts anteriorly to the right. This causes right to left
shunting of blood with resultant cyanosis that is usually present sometime
after birth. Imaging typically shows a boot shaped heart due to the enlarged
right ventricle. There are 4 major defects in tetralogy of Fallot:
– Pulmonary stenosis (most important)
– Membranous interventricular septal defect
– Right ventricular hypertrophy (develops secondarily)
– Overriding aorta (receives blood from both ventricles)
Aorta
1
1. Pulmonary stenosis
Pulmonary
2. Ventricular septal defect
trunk
3. Hypertrophied right ventricle
RA LA
4. Overriding aorta
2
4 LV
RV
3
Figure II 2 26. Tetralogy of Fallot
Figure II 2 26. Tetralogy of Fallot
6
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
• Transposition of the great vessels occurs when the AP septum fails to
develop in a spiral fashion and results in the aorta arising from the right
ventricle and the pulmonary trunk arising from the left ventricle. This
causes right to left shunting of blood with resultant cyanosis.
Pharmacology Biochemistry
– Transposition is the most common cause of severe cyanosis that
persists immediately at birth. Transposition results in producing 2
closed circulation loops.
– Infants born alive with this defect usually have other defects (PDA, VSD,
Physiology MedicalGenetics
ASD) that allow mixing of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood to sustain
life.
ASD
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Aorta
1. Aorta arises from right ventricle
Microbiology
2. Pulmonary trunk arises from left RA Pulmonary
ventricle trunk
LA
3. Usually associated with a VSD,
ASD, or patent ductus arteriosus
VSD
RV
LV
1
2
3
Figure II 2 27. Transposition of the Great Vessels
Figure II 2 27. Transposition of the Great Vessels
• Persistent truncus arteriosus occurs when there is only partial development
of the AP septum. This results in a condition where only one large vessel
leaves the heart that receives blood from both the right and left ventri
cles. This causes right to left shunting of blood with resultant
cyanosis. This defect is always accompanied by a membranous VSD.
6
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
Aorta NOTE
Non cyanotic congenital (left to right)
heart defects at birth:
• Atrial septal defect
Pulmonary artery
• Ventricular septal defects
• Patent ductus arteriosus
Cyanotic congenital (right to left) heart
Truncus arteriosus
defects at birth:
• Transposition of great vessels
• Tetralogy of Fallot
Interventricular septal defect
• Persistent truncus arteriosus
Figure IIFi2gure28. IIPe2rsis2t8en.t Persistent TruncTursuncus AArtreteriroiossuuss
MEDIASTINUM
The mediastinum is the central, midline compartment of the thoracic cavity. It
is bounded anteriorly by the sternum, posteriorly by the 12 thoracic vertebrae, and
laterally by the pleural cavities.
• Superiorly, the mediastinum is continuous with the neck through the
thoracic inlet; and inferiorly, is closed by the diaphragm. The mediasti
num contains most of the viscera of the thoracic cavities except from the
lungs (and pleura) and the sympathetic trunk.
• The sympathetic trunks are primarily located paravertebrally, just outside
the posterior mediastinum. However, the greater, lesser, and least thoracic
splanchnic nerves, which convey preganglionic sympathetic fibers to the
collateral (prevertebral) ganglia below the diaphragm, enter the posterior
mediastinum after leaving the sympathetic trunks.
• The mediastinum is divided into superior and inferior mediastina by a
plane passing from the sternal angle (of Louis) anteriorly to the interver
tebral disc between T4 and T5 posteriorly. The sternal angle and plane are
important clinical landmarks. The inferior mediastinum is classically
subdivided into anterior, middle, and posterior mediastina.
6
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Thoracic
First rib
inlet
T1
Sternal angle
Pharmacology Biochemistry
(second rib)
Superior
T4
mediastinum Horizontal
Anterior
plane of
mediastinum Inferior
sternal angle
(thymus) mediastinum
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Middle Aorta
mediastinum
Esophagus
Posterior
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences T9 mediastinum
Left atrium
Microbiology
T12
Figure II 2 29. Divisions of the Mediastinum
Figure II 2 29. Divisions of the Mediastinum
Anterior Mediastinum
The anterior mediastinum is the small interval between the sternum and the
anterior surface of the pericardium. It contains fat and areolar tissue and the
inferior part of the thymus gland. A tumor of the thymus (thymoma) can develop
in the anterior or superior mediastinum.
Posterior Mediastinum
The posterior mediastinum is located between the posterior surface of the
pericardium and the T5 T12 thoracic vertebrae. Inferiorly, it is closed by the
diaphragm. There are 4 vertically oriented structures coursing within the posterior
mediastinum:
• Thoracic (descending) aorta
– Important branches are the bronchial, esophageal, and posterior
intercostal arteries
– Passes through the aortic hiatus (with the thoracic duct) at the T12
vertebral level to become the abdominal aorta
• Esophagus
– Lies immediately posterior to the left primary bronchus and the left
atrium, forming an important radiological relationship
6
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
– Covered by the anterior and posterior esophageal plexuses, which are
derived from the left and right vagus nerves, respectively
– Passes through the esophageal hiatus (with the vagal nerve trunks) at
the T10 vertebral level
– Is constricted (1) at its origin from the pharynx, (2) posterior to the arch
of the aorta, (3) posterior to the left primary bronchus, and (4) at the
esophageal hiatus of the diaphragm
• Thoracic duct
– Lies posterior to the esophagus and between the thoracic aorta and
azygos vein
– Ascends the posterior and superior mediastina and drains into the
junction of the left subclavian and internal jugular veins
– Arises from the cisterna chyli in the abdomen (at vertebral level L1) and
enters the mediastinum through the aortic hiatus of the diaphragm
• Azygos system of veins
– Drains the posterior and thoracic lateral wall
– Communicates with the inferior vena cava in the abdomen and
terminates by arching over the root of the right lung to empty into the
superior vena cava above the pericardium
– Forms a collateral venous circulation between the inferior and superior
vena cava
Middle Mediastinum
The middle mediastinum contains the heart and great vessels and pericardium,
which will be discussed later.
Superior Mediastinum
The superior mediastinum is located between the manubrium of the sternum,
anteriorly, and the thoracic vertebrae 1 4, posteriorly. As with all mediastina, the
parietal pleura and the lungs form the lateral boundary. The thoracic inlet con
nects superiorly with the neck and the horizontal plane through the sternal angle
forms the inferior boundary.
• The superior mediastinum contains the thymus, great arteries and veins
associated with the upper aspect of the heart, trachea, and esophagus.
• The vagus and phrenic nerves and the thoracic duct also course through
the mediastinum.
• The pulmonary trunk and arteries are located completely in the middle
mediastinum and are not found in the superior mediastinum.
6
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Esophagus Left common carotid artery
Trachea Left vagus nerve (X)
Pharmacology Right vagus nerBvieochemistr(yX)
Right subclavian Left internal jugular vein
artery and vein
Left phrenic nerve
Physiology MedicalGenetics Left subclavian artery and vein
Right brachiocephalic vein Left brachiocephalic vein
Superior Brachiocephalic
Left vagus nerve (X)
Pathology mediastinumBehavioralScience/SocialSciences artery
Middle Right phrenic
mediastinum nerve
Left recurrent laryngeal nerve
Superior vena cava
Microbiology
Ligamentum arteriosum
Aortic arch
Ascending aorta Pulmonary trunk
Figure II 2 30. Structures Figure ofII 2the30. MSetdruiacsttuinreusm of the Mediastinum
The relationships of these structures in the superior mediastinum are best visual
ized in a ventral to dorsal orientation between the sternum anteriorly and the
vertebrae posteriorly:
CLINICAL CORRELATE • Thymus: located posterior to the manubrium, usually atrophies in the
adult and remains as fatty tissue
The left recurrent laryngeal nerve curves
• Right and left brachiocephalic veins: right vein descends almost verti
under the aortic arch distal to the
cally and left vein obliquely crosses the superior mediastinum posterior to
ligamentum arteriosum where it may be
the thymic remnants
damaged by pathology (e.g., malignancy or
– The 2 veins join to form the superior vena cava posterior to the right
aneurysm of the aortic arch), resulting in
first costal cartilage.
paralysis of the left vocal folds. The right
– The superior vena cava descends and drains into the right atrium deep to
laryngeal nerve is not affected because it
the right third costal cartilage.
arises from the right vagus nerve in the root
of the neck and passes under the subclavian • Aortic arch and its 3 branches: aortic arch begins and ends at the plane of
the sternal angle and is located just inferior to the left brachiocephalic vein.
artery.
– As a very important radiological landmark, the origins of the
Either the right or the left recurrent laryngeal
3 branches of the aortic arch (brachiocephalic, left common carotid,
nerve may be lesioned with thyroid gland
and left subclavian) are directly posterior to the left
surgery. brachiocephalic vein.
6
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
• Trachea: lies posterior to the aortic arch and bifurcates at the level of T4
vertebra to form right and left primary bronchi
– The carina is an internal projection of cartilage at the bifurcation.
• Esophagus: lies posterior to the trachea and courses posterior to left
primary bronchus to enter the posterior mediastinum
ln addition to these structures, the superior mediastinum also contains the right
and left vagus and phrenic nerves and the superior end of the thoracic duct.
• Right and left vagus nerves contribute to the pulmonary and cardiac
plexuses. In the neck, the right vagus nerve gives rise to the right recur
rent laryngeal nerve, which passes under the right subclavian artery to
ascend in the groove between the esophagus and the trachea to reach the
larynx. Note: The right recurrent laryngeal nerve is not in the mediasti
num. The left vagus nerve gives rise to the left recurrent laryngeal nerve
in the superior mediastinum, which passes under the aortic arch and
ligamentum arteriosum to ascend to the larynx.
• The thoracic duct is the largest lymphatic channel in the body. It returns
lymph to the venous circulation at the junction of the left internal jugular
vein and the left subclavian vein.
• Phrenic nerves arise from the ventral rami of cervical nerves 3, 4, and 5.
The nerves are the sole motor supply of the diaphragm and convey sensory
information from the central portion of both the superior and inferior
portions of the diaphragm and parietal pleura. Both phrenic nerves pass
through the middle mediastinum lateral between the fibrous pericardium
and pleura, and anterior to the root of the lung.
Coarctation of the Aorta
Coarctation of the aorta is a narrowing of the aorta distal to the origin of the left
subclavian artery. Two types are usually identified based on if the constriction is
found proximal or distal to the opening of the ductus arteriosus (DA).
• Preductal coarctation (infantile type) is less common and occurs proxi
mal to the DA (Figure II 2 31A). The DA usually remains patent and
provides blood flow via the DA to the descending aorta and the lower
parts of the body.
• Postductal coarctation (adult type) is more common and occurs distal to
the DA (Figure II 2 31B). The DA usually closes and obliterates.
– This results in the intercostal arteries providing collateral circulation
between the internal thoracic artery and the thoracic aorta to provide
blood supply to the lower parts of the body (Figure II 2 31C).
– Patients will be hypertensive in the upper body (head, neck, and upper
limbs) and hypotensive with weak pulses in the lower limbs.
– Enlargement of the intercostal arteries results in costal notching on the
lower border of the ribs, evident in imaging.
6
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Subclavian artery
Common carotid Subscapular artery
Pharmacology arBteiroiecshemistry
Patent ductus Postductal
arteriosus coarctation
Physiology MedicalGenetics Intercostal
Pulmonary arteries
artery Ligamentum
arteriosum
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Inferior epigastric artery
AB C
Microbiology Figure II 2 31. Coarctation of the Aorta: (A) Preductal; (B) Postductal; (C) Collateral Circulation
Figure II 2 31. Coarctation of the Aorta: (A) Preductal; (B) Postductal; (C) Collateral Circulation
Middle Mediastinum
The middle mediastinum contains the pericardium, the heart, parts of the great
vessels, and the phrenic nerves.
The pericardium is the serous sac covering the heart. It is the only one of the
serous membranes that has 3 layers: an outer fibrous layer and a double layered
parietal and visceral serous layers.
Position of transverse
pericardial sinus
Heart
Fibrous pericardium
Serous pericardium
Parietal layer
Visceral layer (epicardium)
Pericardial cavity
Diaphragm
Figure II 2Figu3r2e. LIIay2ers32. Layoefrs theof thPeericPaerdriicuamrdium
6
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
The fibrous pericardium surrounds the entire heart and the great vessels at the
upper aspect of the heart. It is firmly attached below to the central tendon of the
diaphragm and superiorly to the adventitia of the great vessels at the plane of the
sternal angle (level of the second rib). The fibrous pericardium is very strong and
maintains the position of the heart within the middle mediastinum.
The serous pericardium is double layered and formed by the outer parietal layer
that lines the inner aspect of the fibrous pericardium and the inner visceral layer
(epicardium) that covers the surface of the heart. The reflection between these 2
serous layers is at the base of the great vessels.
The pericardial cavity is the potential space between the parietal and visceral
layers containing a small amount of serous fluid that allows free movement of the
beating heart. The pericardial cavity is expanded to form 2 sinuses:
• The transverse pericardial sinus is a space posterior to the ascending
CLINICAL CORRELATE
aorta and pulmonary trunk and anterior to the superior vena cava and
Cardiac tamponade is the pathological
pulmonary veins. Note that it separates the great arteries from the great
veins. The transverse sinus is useful in cardiac surgery to allow isolation of accumulation of fluids (serous or blood)
the aorta and pulmonary trunk. within the pericardial cavity. The fluid
• The oblique pericardial sinus is the blind, inverted, U shaped space compresses the heart and restricts venous
posterior to the heart and bounded by reflection of serous pericardium filling during diastole and reduces cardiac
around the 4 pulmonary veins and the inferior vena cava as they enter the output. To remove the fluid, pericardiocentesis
heart. is performed with a needle at the left
infrasternal angle through the cardiac notch
of the left lung.
HEART
The heart lies obliquely within the middle mediastinum, mostly posterior to the
sternum. Externally, the heart can be described by its borders and surfaces.
Borders of the Heart
• The right border is formed by the right atrium.
• The left border is mainly formed by the left ventricle.
• The apex is the tip of the left ventricle, and is found in the left fifth
intercostal space.
• The superior border is formed by the right and left auricles plus the conus
arteriosus of the right ventricle.
• The inferior border is formed at the diaphragm, mostly by the right
ventricle.
6
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Aorta
Superior
Ligamentum arteriosum
vena cava
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Right Left pulmonary artery
pulmonary
Pulmonary trunk
artery
Left atrium
Physiology MedicalGenetics Right
pulmonary
Left
veins
pulmonary
veins
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Left ventricle
(Left border)
Right atrium
(Right border) Right
ventricle
Microbiology
Inferior
vena cava Apex
Figure II 2 33. Sternocostal View of the Heart
Figure II 2 33. Sternocostal View of the Heart
Surfaces of the Heart
• The anterior (sternocostal) surface is formed primarily by the right
ventricle.
• The posterior surface is formed primarily by the left atrium.
• The diaphragmatic surface is formed primarily by the left ventricle.
There are 3 main sulci (coronary and the anterior and posterior interventricu
lar) that course on the surfaces of the heart; they contain the major vessels of the
heart and epicardial fat.
Coronary
sulcus
Anterior
LA
interventricular Posterior
RA
sulcus surfac
RA
LV
RV
LV RV Diaphragmatic
surface
Posterior
interventricular
sulcus
Anterior
(Sternocostal surface) Posterior
Figure II 2 34. Surfaces of Heart with Sulci
Figure II 2 34. Surfaces of Heart with Sulci
70
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
Surface Projections of the Heart
Surface projections of the heart may be traced on the anterior chest wall.
• The upper right aspect of the heart is deep to the third right costal
cartilage.
• The lower right aspect of the heart is deep to the sixth right costal
cartilage.
• The upper left aspect of the heart is deep to the left second costal
cartilage
• The apex of the heart is in the left fifth intercostal space at the
midclavicular line.
• The right border extends between the margin of the third right costal
cartilage to the sixth right costal cartilage just to the right of the sternum.
• The left border extends between the fifth left intercostal space to the
second left costal cartilage.
• The inferior border extends from the sixth right costal cartilage to the
fifth left intercostal space at the midclavicular line.
• The superior border extends from the inferior margin of the second left
costal cartilage to the superior margin of the third right costal cartilage.
Rib 2
Rib 3 Upper Left
Upper Right
Rib 5
Lower Right Apex
Rib 6
Figure II 2 35. Surface Projections of the Heart
Figure II 2 35. Surface Projections of the Heart
7
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Chambers of the Heart
The right atrium receives venous blood from the entire body with the exception of
blood from the pulmonary veins.
Pharmacology Biochemistry
• The auricle is derived from the fetal atrium; it has rough myocardium
known as pectinate muscles.
• The sinus venarum is the smooth walled portion of the atrium, which
receives blood from the superior and inferior venae cavae. It developed
Physiology MedicalGenetics from the sinus venosus.
• The crista terminalis is the vertical ridge that separates the smooth from
the rough portion (pectinate muscles) of the right atrium; it extends
longitudinally from the superior vena cava to the inferior vena cava. The
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences SA node is in the upper part of the crista terminalis.
• The fossa ovalis is close to the foramen ovale, an opening in the interatrial
septum which allows blood entering the right atrium from the inferior
vena cava to pass directly to the left side of the heart.
Microbiology
• The right AV (tricuspid) valve communicates with the right ventricle.
Aorta
Superior Crista
vena cava terminalis
Tricuspid
valve
Sinus
venarum
Pectinate
muscles
Fossa
ovalis
Tricuspid
Coronary
valve
sinus
Inferior
vena cava
Figure FiguIrIe 2 II36.2 36I.nsidIenside tthhee RRigighhtt AtriumAtrium
The left atrium receives oxygenated blood from the lungs via the pulmonary veins.
There are 4 openings: upper right and left, and lower right and left pulmonary
veins. The left AV orifice is guarded by the mitral (bicuspid) valve; it allows
oxygenated blood to pass from the left atrium to the left ventricle.
The right ventricle receives blood from the right atrium via the tricuspid valve;
outflow is to the pulmonary trunk via the pulmonary semilunar valve.
• The trabeculae carneae are ridges of myocardium in the ventricular wall.
• The papillary muscles project into the cavity of the ventricle and attach to
cusps of the AV valve by the strands of the chordae tendineae.
7
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
• The chordae tendineae are fibrous cords between the papillary muscles
and the valve leaflets that control closure of the valve during contraction
of the ventricle.
• The infundibulum is the smooth area of the right ventricle leading to the
pulmonary valve.
• The septomarginal trabecula (moderator band) is a band of cardiac
muscle between interventricular septum and anterior papillary muscle
which conducts part of the cardiac conduction system.
In the left ventricle, blood enters from the left atrium through the mitral valve and
is pumped out to the aorta through the aortic valve.
• The trabeculae carneae are ridges of myocardium in the ventricular wall,
normally thicker than those of the right ventricle.
• The papillary muscles, usually 2 large ones, are attached by the chordae
tendineae to the cusps of the bicuspid valve.
• The chordae tendineae act in same way as the right ventricle.
• The aortic vestibule leads to the aortic semilunar valve and ascending
aorta.
Interventricular
septum Aortic semilunar
valve
Tricuspid
AV valve Bicuspid AV valve
(mitral valve)
Valve leaflet
Valve leaflet
Chordae Chordae tendineae
tendineae
Papillary muscle
Papillary
muscle Trabeculae carneae
Septomarginal
trabecula
(moderator band)
Figure II 2 37. Right and Left Ventricles
Figure II 2 37. Right and Left Ventricles
HEART HISTOLOGY
Cardiac muscle is striated in the same manner as skeletal muscle, but it differs in
being composed of smaller cells (fibers) with only 1 or 2 nuclei. The nuclei are
located centrally, instead of peripherally.
7
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Layers of the Heart Wall
The heart wall is composed of 3 distinct layers: an outer epicardium, a middle
myocardium and an inner endocardium. The epicardium, or visceral layer of
serous pericardium, consists of a simple squamous epithelium (mesothelium) and
Pharmacology Biochemistry
its underlying connective tissue. The connective tissue contains a large number
of fat cells and the coronary vessels. The muscular wall of the heart is the
myocardium and is composed mainly of cardiac muscle cells. The endocardium,
which lines the chambers of the heart, is composed of a simple squamous
Physiology MedicalGenetics epithelium, the endothelium, and a thin layer of connective tissue. Cardiac muscle
is striated like skeletal muscle, but these cells are smaller, with centrally placed
nuclei. Cardiac muscle has a similar but somewhat less well developed T tubule
system compared to skeletal muscle that is located at the Z line.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Intercalated Discs
Intercalated discs are special junctional complexes that join myocardial cells. The
intercalated discs appear as dark, transverse lines in the light microscope. These
Microbiology disks contain gap junctions and adhering junctions. These junctions permit the
spread of electrical (gap) and mechanical (adhering) effects through the walls of the
heart, synchronizing activity for the pumping action of the heart chambers. While
intercalated discs allow coordinated action of the myocardial cells, the squeezing
and twisting movements of the heart chambers (particularly the left ventricle)
during systole are due to the disposition of cardiac myocytes.
Purkinje cells are modified cardiac muscle cells with fewer contractile filaments.
They are specialized for electrical impulse conduction rather than contraction.
Purkinje cells are found in the conduction system of the heart.
AUSCULTATION OF HEART VALVES
Points of Auscultation
Points of auscultation of the semilunar valves (aortic and pulmonary) and the
atrioventricular valves (tricuspid and mitral or bicuspid) are shown below. The
first heart sound occurs at the closure of the atrioventricular valves at the begin
ning of systole and the second heart sound occurs at the closure of the aortic and
pulmonary semilunar valves at the end of systole.
Heart Murmurs
Murmurs in valvular heart disease result when there is valvular insufficiency or
regurgitation (the valves fail to close completely) or stenosis (narrowing of the
valves). The aortic and mitral valves are more commonly involved in valvular
heart disease.
For most of ventricular systole, the mitral valve should be closed and the aortic
valve should be open, so that “common systolic valvular defects” include mitral
insufficiency and aortic stenosis. For most of ventricular diastole, the mitral valve
should be open and the aortic valve should be closed, so that “common diastolic
valvular defects” include mitral stenosis and aortic insufficiency.
A heart murmur is heard downstream from the valve. Thus, stenosis is orthograde
direction from valve and insufficiency is retrograde direction from valve.
7
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
VALVES OF THE HEART
• Atrioventricular
Right heart: tricuspid
Left heart: bicuspid
• Semilunar
Aortic (3 cusps)
Aortic Pulmonary
valve valve Pulmonary (3 cusps)
Tricuspid
valve
Mitral valve
Figure FigureII 2II402. 38.SurSfaucreface PrPorjoecjeticotinosns of the ofHeartthe Heart
Right upper sternum
– Systolic
Rib 2
• Aortic stenosis
Upper lateral chest
Rib 3
– Systolic
• Mitral insufficiency
Rib 5
Rib 6 Apex
– Diastolic
• Mitral stenosis
• Aortic insufficiency
Right lower sternum
– Systolic
• Tricuspid insufficiency
Figure IIFigu2re 41.II 2Aus3c9u.ltatAiounscultation ofof HHeeaartrt MMurmurumrsurs
7
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Table II 2 4. Heart Murmurs
Stenosis Insufficiency
A V Valves Diastolic murmur Systolic murmur
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Tricuspid (right)
Mitral (left)
Outflow Valves Systolic murmur Diastolic murmur
Physiology MedicalGenetics Pulmonic (right)
Aortic (left)
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Arterial Supply of the Heart
The blood supply to the myocardium is provided by branches of the right and left
coronary arteries. These 2 arteries are the only branches of the ascending aorta
Microbiology
and arise from the right and left aortic sinuses of the ascending aorta, respec
tively. Blood flow enters the coronary arteries during diastole.
Left coronary
artery
Circumflex
SA
artery
nodal
artery
Left anterior
descending
Right
(LAD) artery
coronary
artery
Diagonal
CLINICAL CORRELATE AV
artery
nodal
In myocardial infarction, the left anterior
artery
descending artery is obstructed in 50% of
Marginal Posterior
cases, the right coronary in 30%, and the
artery interventricular
circumflex artery in 20% of cases. artery
Figure FigureII 2II422. 40.ArAterrtiearlial SuSpupplyply to thteo Htehaert Heart
7
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
Right coronary artery
The right coronary artery courses in the coronary sulcus and supplies major parts
of the right atrium and the right ventricle. The branches include the following:
• Sinoatrial (SA) nodal artery: One of the first branches of the right
coronary, it encircles the base of the superior vena cava to supply the SA
node.
• Atrioventricular (AV) nodal artery: It arises from the distal end of the
right coronary artery as it forms the posterior interventricular artery and
penetrates the interatrial septum to supply the AV node.
• Posterior interventricular artery: It is the terminal distribution of the
right coronary artery and courses in the posterior interventricular sulcus
to supply parts of the right and left ventricles and, importantly, the
posterior third of the interventricular septum.
Left coronary artery
The left coronary artery travels a short course between the left auricle and
ventricle, and divides into 2 branches: anterior interventricular or left anterior
descending (LAD) artery and circumflex artery.
• The anterior interventricular artery descends in the anterior interven
tricular sulcus and provides branches to the (1) anterior left ventricle
wall, (2) anterior two thirds of the interventricular septum, (3) bundle
of His, and (4) apex. The LAD is the most common site of coronary
occlusion.
• The circumflex artery courses around the left border of the heart in the
coronary sulcus and supplies (1) the left border of the heart via the
marginal branch and (2) ends on the posterior aspect of the left ventricle
and supplies the posterior inferior left ventricular wall.
Venous Drainage of the Heart
The major cardiac veins draining the heart course in the sulci and accompany the
arteries but do not carry the same names. The major veins are the following:
• Coronary sinus is the main vein of the coronary circulation; it lies in the
posterior coronary sulcus and drains to an opening in the right atrium. It
develops from the left sinus venosus.
• Great cardiac vein lies in the anterior interventricular sulcus with the
LAD artery; it is the main tributary of the coronary sinus.
• Middle cardiac vein lies in the posterior interventricular sulcus with the
posterior interventricular artery; it joins the coronary sinus.
• Venae cordis minimae (thebesian veins) and anterior cardiac veins open
directly to the chambers of the heart.
7
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Coronary
sinus
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Great
cardiac
LA
vein
RA
Coronary RA
Physiology MedicalGenetics
sulcus
LV
RV
LV
RV Small
cardiac
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences vein
Anterior Posterior Middle
interventricular interventricular cardiac
sulcus sulcus vein
Microbiology Anterior Posterior
Figure II 2 43. Venous Drainage of the Heart
Figure II 2 41. Venous Drainage of the Heart
Conducting System of the Heart
The cardiac conduction system is a specialized group of myocardial cells that
initiates the periodic contractions of the heart due to their ability to depolarize at a
faster rate than other cardiac myocytes. Electrical activity spreads through the
walls of the atria from the SA node and is quickly passed by way of internodal
fibers to the atrioventricular node. From the atrioventricular node, activity passes
through the bundle of His and then down the right and left bundle branches in the
interventricular septum. The bundle branches reach additional specialized cardiac
muscle fibers known as Purkinje fibers in the ventricular walls.
• The Purkinje fibers run in several bundles along the endocardial surface
and initiate ventricle activity starting at the apex of the ventricles.
• Purkinje fibers have a large cross section, a cytoplasm with few contractile
fibrils and a large content of glycogen.
The SA node initiates the impulse for contraction of heart muscle (and is therefore
termed the “pacemaker” of the heart). It is located at the superior end of the crista
terminalis, where the superior vena cava enters the right atrium.
• The SA node is supplied by the SA nodal branch of the right coronary
artery.
• Impulse production is speeded up by sympathetic nervous stimulation; it
is slowed by parasympathetic (vagal) stimulation.
The AV node receives impulses from the SA node; it is located in the interatrial
septum near the opening of the coronary sinus. The AV node slows the impulse so
that it reaches the ventricles after it has reached the atria.
• The AV node is supplied by the right coronary artery.
7
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
The bundle of His originates in the AV node. It conducts impulses to the right and
left ventricles. It is supplied by the LAD artery.
• In the right ventricle, the moderator band (septomarginal trabecula)
contains the right bundle branch.
• Impulses pass from the right and left bundle branches to the papillary
muscles and ventricular myocardium.
Innervation
The cardiac plexus is a combination of sympathetic and parasympathetic (vagal)
fibers.
• Sympathetic stimulation increases the heart rate. Nerves that sense pain
associated with coronary artery ischemia (angina) follow the sympathetic
pathways back into spinal cord segments T1–T5.
• Parasympathetic stimulation slows the heart rate. Sensory nerves that
carry the afferent limb of cardiac reflexes travel with the vagus nerve.
Atrioventricular node
Superior (AV node)
vena cava
Left atrium
Sinoatrial node
Pulmonary
(SA node)
veins
Common AV bundle
Left ventricle
Right atrium
Right and left
Right ventricle
bundle branches
Inferior
vena cava
Purkinje
fibers
Figure FIIigur2e 44.II 2Ca4r2d.iacCardiac ConCdouncdtiuocntion SySsytesmtem
DIAPHRAGM
The diaphragm is composed of a muscular portion and a central tendon. It is
dome shaped, and descends upon contraction of its muscular portion. It is inner
vated by the phrenic nerves that arise from spinal cord segments C3 through C5.
7
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
The diaphragm is formed by the fusion of tissue from 4 sources:
• The septum transversum gives rise to the central tendon of the
diaphragm.
Pharmacology Biochemistry • The pleuroperitoneal membranes give rise to parts of the tendinous
portion of the diaphragm.
• The dorsal mesentery of the esophagus gives rise to the crura of the
diaphragm.
Physiology MedicalGenetics • The body wall contributes muscle to the periphery of the diaphragm.
Apertures in the Diaphragm
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Caval hiatus is located to the right of the midline at the level of T8, within the
central tendon. It transmits the inferior vena cava and some branches of the right
phrenic nerve.
Esophageal hiatus is located to the left of the midline at the level of T10, within
Microbiology the muscle of the right crus. It transmits the esophagus and the anterior and
posterior vagus trunks.
Aortic hiatus is located in the midline at the level of T12, behind the 2 crura. It
transmits the aorta and thoracic duct.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Pain Referral
Because the innervation to the diaphragm T1
(motor and sensory) is primarily from C3
through C5 spinal nerves, pain arising from
the diaphragm (e.g., subphrenic abscess) is
T4
referred to these dermatomes in the
shoulder region.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
A congenital diaphragmatic hernia is
a herniation of abdominal contents into the
T9
pleural cavity due to the failure of the
pleuroperitoneal membranes to develop
properly. The hernia is most commonly found Diaphrapghmragm
on the left posterolateral side and causes Inferiorrior vveennaa ccaavvaa ((TT88))
pulmonary hypoplasia.
Esophaogpuhsagus ((TT1100))
An esophageal hiatal hernia is a herniation
of the stomach into the pleural cavity due to Aorta ta ((TT1T21)22)
an abnormally large esophageal hiatus to
the diaphragm. This condition renders the
esophagogastric sphincter incompetent so
that contents reflux into the esophagus.
Figure II 2 45. The Diaphrag
Figure II 2 43. The Diaphragm
80
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
RADIOLOGY
Aortic
Arch
Left
Pulmonary
Superior Artery
Vena Cava Left
Atrium
Right
Atrium Left
Ventricle
From the IMC, © 2010 DxR Development Group, Inc.
From the IMC, © 2010 DxR Development Group, Inc.
All rights reserved.
All rights reserved.
Figure II 2 46. Anterior Projection of Chest, Male
Figure II 2 44. Anterior Projection of Chest, Male
Left
Right
Atrium
Ventricle
Left
Ventricle
Right
Dome of
Diaphragm
Left
Dome of
Diaphragm
From the IMC, © 2010 DxR Development Group, Inc.
All rights reserved.
Figure II 2 45. Lateral Projection of Chest, Male
8
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Brachiocephalic trunk
Right brachiocephalic vein Left brachiocephalic vein
All
Pharmacology Biochemistry From
righttshe
IMC,
©
reserved.
2010
Physiology MedicalGenetics
DxR
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Development
Group,
Inc.
Microbiology
Trachea Left subclavian artery
Esophagus Left common carotid artery
Figure II 2 48. Chest: CT, T2
Figure II 2 46. Chest: CT, T2
Superior Vena Cava Aortic Arch Trachea Esophagus
All
FFrroomm
righttt shhee
IMC,
©IMC,
reser©ved
2010
2010
DxR
DxR
All
Development
Development
rights
Group,
Group,
Inc.
reservIendc..
Ribs T3 Vertebra Scapula
Figure II 2 49. Chest: CT, T3
Figure II 2 47. Chest: CT, T3
82
CHAPTER 2 | THORAX
Superior Ascending Bifurcation of Descending
Vena Cava Aorta Trachea Aorta
All
From
righttshe
From
thIeMC,
©
reserved.
IMC,
2010
©
DxR
2010
DxR
Development
All
DeGvreoluopp,ment
rightsInc.
Group,
reservInecd..
Ribs T4 Vertebra Scapula
Figure FigureII 2II 250.48. CChheesst:t: CT,CTT,4 T4
Right
Pulmonary Superior Body of Ascending Pulmonary
Artery Vena Cava Sternum Aorta Trunk
All
From
righttshe
From
IthMeC,
©
reserved.
IMC,
2010
©
DxR
2010
DxR
Development
All
GDreovueplo,pment
rights
Inc.
Group,
reserIvnecd.
Descending Aorta T5 Vertebra Spinal Cord
Figure II 2 51. Chest: CT, T5
Figure II 2 49. Chest: CT, T5
83
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
PA = pulmonary artery
Used
RA = right atrium withCopyright
Pharmacology AA = ascending Bioacohretamistry PA
Lippincott PA = p
LA = left atrium permission. RA
AA RA = ri
E = esophagus Williams AA = a
&
LA LA = le
Physiology MedicalGenetics
DA = descending aorta
E E = es
Wilkins.
DA DA = d
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Copyright Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. Used with permission.
Microbiology
Figure II 2 52. Chest: CT, T5
Figure II 2 50. Chest: CT, T5
Right Right Left
Atrium Ventricle Ventricle
All
From
righ
F
ttshroem
tIhMeC,
©
reserved.
IMC,
©2010
2D0x1R0
DxR
Development
Development
Group,
Inc.
rights
Group,
Inc.
reservAeldl
T6 Vertebra Spinal Cord Descending Left
Aorta Atrium
Esophagus
Figure II 2 53. Chest: CT, T6
Figure II 2 51. Chest: CT, T6
84
3#
Abdomen, Pelvis, and Perineum
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Explain information related to inguinal region and canal
❏ Answer questions about embryology of the GI system
❏ Solve problems concerning peritoneum
❏ Answer questions about GI histology, innervation, and immune
functions
❏ Solve problems concerning arterial supply and venous drainage to
abdominal viscera
❏ Explain information related to posterior abdominal body wall
❏ Answer questions about urinary histology and function
❏ Use knowledge of male and female reproductive histology
❏ Demonstrate understanding of radiology of the abdomen and pelvis
ANTERIOR ABDOMINAL WALL
Surface Anatomy
The linea alba is a shallow groove that runs vertically in the median plane from
the xiphoid to the pubis. It separates the right and left rectus abdominis muscles.
The components of the rectus sheath intersect at the linea alba.
The linea semilunaris is a curved line defining the lateral border of the rectus
abdominis, a bilateral feature.
Planes and Regions
The anterior abdominal wall is divided into 9 regions separated by several planes
and lines.
The subcostal plane (horizontal) passes through the inferior margins of the 10th
costal cartilages at the level of the third lumbar vertebra.
The transpyloric plane passes through the L1 vertebra, being half the distance
between the pubis and the jugular notch. The plane passes through several
important abdominal landmarks useful for radiology: pylorus of the stomach
(variable), fundus of gallbladder, neck and body of the pancreas, hila of kidneys,
first part of the duodenum, and origin of the superior mesenteric artery.
8
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
The midclavicular lines (vertical) are the 2 planes that pass from the midpoint of
the clavicle to the midpoint of the inguinal ligament on each side.
Pharmacology Biochemistry
RH: right hypochondrium
LH: left hypochondrium
RL: right lumbar
Physiology MedicalGenetics
LL: left lumbar
RI: right inguinal
LI: left inguinal
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Microbiology
RH Epigastrium LH
Subcostal
plane
RL Umbilical LL
Intertubercular
plane
Hypogastrium
RI LI Anterior
Inguinal superior iliac
ligament spine
Pubic
tubercle
Figure II 3 1. RegIIion3s 1. Regiaonnds aPnldanesPlanes ofofthtehe AAbbddoommeennFigure
Muscles and Fasciae
The anterolateral abdominal body wall is a multilayer of fat, fasciae, and muscles
(with their aponeuroses) that support and protect the abdominal contents. Three
flat abdominal muscles are arranged in layers and the rectus abdominis is oriented
vertically adjacent to the midline, extending between the costal margin and the
pubis. Abdominal muscles are important in respiration, defecation, micturition,
childbirth, etc.
8
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Skin NOTE
Superficial fascia of the anterior abdominal wall below the umbilicus consists of 2 Anterior Abdominal Wall Layers
layers:
• Skin
• Camper (fatty) fascia is the outer, subcutaneous layer of superficial fascia
• Superficial fascia: Camper (fatty) and
that is variable in thickness owing to the presence of fat.
Scarpa (fibrous)
• Scarpa (membranous) fascia is the deeper layer of superficial fascia devoid
of fat. It is continuous into the perineum with various perineal fascial • External oblique
layers (Colles’ fascia, dartos fascia of the scrotum, superficial fascia of the
• Internal oblique
clitoris or penis).
• Transversus abdominis
Muscles • Transversalis fascia
The external abdominal oblique muscle and aponeurosis is the most superficial
• Extraperitoneal connective tissue
of the 3 flat muscles of the abdominal wall. Its contributions to the abdominal wall
and inguinal region are the following: • Parietal peritoneum
• Inguinal ligament is the inferior rolled under aponeurotic fibers of the
external oblique that extend between the anterior superior iliac spine and
the pubic tubercle. Medially, the fibers of the inguinal ligament form a
flattened horizontal shelf called the lacunar ligament that attaches deeply
to the pectineal line of the pubis and continues as the pectineal ligament.
Lacunar ligament forms the medial border of a femoral hernia.
• Superficial inguinal ring is a vertical triangular cleft in the external
oblique aponeurosis that represents the medial opening of the inguinal
canal just superior and lateral to the pubic tubercle. It transmits the
structures of the female and male inguinal canals.
• External spermatic fascia is the outer layer of the 3 coverings of the
spermatic cord formed at the superficial inguinal ring in males.
• Rectus sheath: The external aponeuroses contribute to the anterior layer
of the rectus sheath.
8
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Lumbar
vertebrae
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Anterior superior
Sacrum
iliac spine
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Ischial
spine
Coccyx
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Inguinal
ligament
Pubic
tubercle
Microbiology
Pubic
symphysis
Figure II 3 2. Osteology of the Abdominopelvic Cavity
Figure II 3 2. Osteology of the Abdominopelvic Cavity
Internal abdominal oblique muscle and aponeurosis: This middle layer of the 3
flat muscles originates, in part, from the lateral two thirds of the inguinal liga
ment. The internal oblique fibers course medially and arch over the inguinal canal
in parallel with the arching fibers of the transversus abdominis muscle. The
contributions of the internal abdominal oblique to the abdominal wall and
inguinal region are the following:
• Conjoint tendon (falx inguinalis) is formed by the combined arching
fibers of the internal oblique and the transversus abdominis muscles that
insert on the pubic crest posterior to the superficial inguinal ring.
• Rectus sheath: The internal aponeuroses contribute to the layers of the
rectus sheath.
• Cremasteric muscle and fascia represent the middle layer of the spermatic
fascia covering the spermatic cord and testis in the male. It forms in the
inguinal canal.
Transversus abdominis muscle and aponeurosis: This is the deepest of the flat
muscles. The transversus muscle originates, in part, from the lateral one third of
the inguinal ligament and arches over the inguinal canal with the internal oblique
fibers to contribute to the conjoint tendon. The aponeuroses of the transversus
muscle also contribute to the layers of the rectus sheath. It does not contribute to
any of the layers of the spermatic fasciae.
Abdominopelvic Fasciae and Peritoneum
Transversalis fascia: This fascia forms a continuous lining of the entire abdomino
pelvic cavity. Its contributions to the inguinal region include the following:
8
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
• Deep inguinal ring is formed by an outpouching of the transversalis
fascia immediately above the midpoint of the inguinal ligament and
represents the lateral and deep opening of the inguinal canal. The inferior
epigastric vessels are medial to the deep ring.
• Internal spermatic fascia is the deepest of the coverings of the spermatic
cord formed at the deep ring in the male.
• Femoral sheath is an inferior extension of the transversalis fascia deep to
the inguinal ligament into the thigh containing the femoral artery and
vein and the femoral canal (site of femoral hernia).
• Rectus sheath: The transversalis fascia contributes to the posterior layer of
the rectus sheath.
Extraperitoneal connective tissue is a thin layer of loose connective tissue and fat
surrounding the abdominopelvic cavity, most prominent around the kidneys. The
gonads develop from the urogenital ridge within this layer.
Parietal peritoneum is the outer serous membrane that lines the abdominopelvic
cavity.
Parietal peritoneum
Extraperitoneal fat Deep inguinal ring
Inferior epigastric artery & vein
Transversalis
fascia
Weak area
Rectus abdominus
Transversus
Conjoint tendon
abdominus
(falx inguinalis)
Internal
abdominal oblique
External
abdominal oblique
External oblique fascia
External spermatic fascia
Internal oblique fascia
Cremasteric muscle Cremaster muscle and fascia
Transversalis fascia
Superficial inguinal ring
Internal spermatic fascia
FFiigguurree II 3II3.3Lay3e.rs LayoerfsAnterolateorfal AnterolaAtebrdaolminal WalAlbdoamndinalInguinal WCaalnlal and Inguinal Canal
8
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Nerves, Blood Vessels, and Lymphatics of Abdominal Wall
Innervation of the skin and musculature of the anterior abdominal wall is via
branches of the ventral primary rami of the lower 6 thoracic spinal nerves
(includes the subcostal nerve), plus the iliohypogastric and ilioinguinal branches
Pharmacology Biochemistry
of the ventral primary rami of L1.
The major arterial blood supply to the anterior wall is derived from the superior
epigastric branch of the internal thoracic artery, as well as the inferior epigastric
Physiology MedicalGenetics and the deep circumflex iliac branches of the external iliac artery.
Venous drainage from the anterior wall is to the superficial epigastric, the lateral
thoracic veins superiorly and the great saphenous vein inferiorly.
Lymph drainage from tissues of the anterior wall is to axillary nodes superiorly
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
and to superficial inguinal nodes inferiorly.
INGUINAL REGION AND CANAL
Microbiology
The inguinal canal is the oblique passageway (approximately 4 cm long) in the
lower aspect of the anterior abdominal wall running parallel and superior to the
medial half of the inguinal ligament. Clinically, the inguinal region is important
because it is the area where inguinal hernias occur.
The entrance into the canal is the deep inguinal ring, located just lateral to the
inferior epigastric vessels and immediately superior to the midpoint of the
inguinal ligament.
The superficial inguinal ring is the medial opening of the canal superolateral to
the pubic tubercle.
Contents of the Inguinal Canal
Female Inguinal Canal
Round ligament of the uterus extends between the uterus and labia majora, and
is a remnant of the caudal genital ligament and the homologue of the
gubernaculum testis of the male.
Ilioinguinal nerve (L1), a branch of the lumbar plexus, exits the superficial ring to
supply the skin of the anterior part of the mons pubis and labia majora.
Male Inguinal Canal
Ilioinguinal nerve (L1), a branch of the lumbar plexus, exits the superficial ring to
supply the skin of the lateral and anterior scrotum.
The spermatic cord is formed during descent of the testis and contains structures
that are related to the testis. The cord begins at the deep ring and courses through
the inguinal canal and exits the superficial ring to enter the scrotum. The cord
contains the following:
• Testicular artery, branch of the abdominal aorta that supplies the testis
9
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
• Pampiniform venous plexus, an extensive network of veins draining the
testis located within the scrotum and spermatic cord. The veins of the
CLINICAL CORRELATE
plexus coalesce to form the testicular vein at the deep ring. The venous
plexus assists in the regulation of the temperature of the testis. Avaricocele develops when blood collects in
• Vas deferens (ductus deferens) and its artery the pampiniform venous plexus and causes
dilated and tortuous veins. This may result in
• Autonomic nerves
swelling and enlargement of the scrotum or
• Lymphatics: Lymphatic drainage of the testis will drain into the lumbar
enlargement of the spermatic cord above
(aortic) nodes of the lumbar region and not to the superficial inguinal
the scrotum. Varicoceles are more prominent
nodes which drain the rest of the male perineum.
when standing because of the blood pooling
There are 3 fascial components derived from the layers of the abdominal wall
into the scrotum. Avaricocele will reduce in
that surround the spermatic cord:
size when the individual is horizontal.
• External spermatic fascia is formed by the aponeuroses of the external
abdominal oblique muscle at the superficial ring.
• Middle or cremasteric muscle and fascia are formed by fibers of the
internal abdominal oblique within the inguinal canal. The cremasteric
muscle elevates the testis and helps regulate the thermal environment of
the testis.
• Internal spermatic fascia is formed by the transversalis fascia at the deep
ring.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Boundaries of the Inguinal Canal
Cancers of the penis and scrotum will
The roof is formed by fibers of the internal abdominal oblique and the transversus
abdominis muscles arching over the spermatic cord. metastasize to the superficial inguinal
lymph nodes, and testicular cancer will
The anterior wall is formed by aponeurosis of the external abdominal oblique
metastasize to the aortic (lumbar) nodes.
throughout the inguinal canal and the internal abdominal oblique muscle laterally.
The floor formed by inguinal ligament throughout the entire inguinal canal and
the lacunar ligament at the medial end. CLINICAL CORRELATE
In males, a cremasteric reflex can be
The posterior wall is divided into lateral and medial areas:
demonstrated by lightly touching the skin of
• Lateral area is formed by the transversalis fascia and represents the weak
the upper medial thigh, resulting in a slight
area of the posterior wall.
elevation of the testis. The sensory fibers of
• Medial area is formed and reinforced by the fused aponeurotic fibers of the reflex are carried by the L1 fibers of the
the internal abdominal oblique and transversus abdominis muscles
ilioinguinal nerve and the motor response is
(conjoint tendon).
a function of the genital branch of the
• Inferior epigastric artery and vein ascend the posterior wall just lateral to
genitofemoral nerve that innervates the
the weak area and just medial to the deep ring.
cremasteric muscle.
Descent of the Testes
CLINICAL CORRELATE
The testis develops from the mesoderm of the urogenital ridge within the
extraperitoneal connective tissue layer. During the last trimester, it descends the Failure of one or both of the testes to
posterior abdominal wall inferiorly toward the deep inguinal ring guided by the descend completely into the scrotum results
fibrous gubernaculum.
in cryptorchidism, which may lead to
sterility if bilateral.
9
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
• An evagination of the parietal peritoneum and the peritoneal cavity
extends into the inguinal canal called the processus vaginalis. The open
connection of the processus vaginalis with the peritoneal cavity closes
before birth.
Pharmacology Biochemistry
• A portion of the processus vaginalis remains patent in the scrotum and
surrounds the testis as the tunica vaginalis.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Peritoneum Peritoneum
Testes Testes
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Microbiology
Tunica
Pubis vaginali
Processus
vaginalis
Gubernaculum
A BC D
Figure II 3 4. Descent of the Testes
Figure II 3 4. Descent of the Testes
CLINICAL CORRELATE Inguinal Hernias
Herniation of abdominal viscera can occur in one of several weak aspects of the
Apersistent process vaginalis often results
abdominal wall (e.g. inguinal, femoral, umbilical, or diaphragmatic). Inguinal
in a congenital indirect inguinal hernia.
hernias are the most common of the abdominal hernias and occur more frequently
in males due to the inherent weakness of the male inguinal canal. Inguinal hernias
occur superior to the inguinal ligament.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
• Indirect inguinal hernias result when abdominal contents protrude
Acollection of serous fluid in the tunica
through the deep inguinal ring lateral to the inferior epigastric vessels.
vaginalis forms a hydrocele, resulting in an
After passing through the inguinal canal and superficial ring, the viscera
enlarged scrotum. Ahydrocele does not can continue and coil in the scrotum.
reduce in size when the patient is lying
– Indirect hernias follow the route taken by the testis and are found
down.
within the spermatic cord.
– They are covered by the 3 layers of spermatic fascia.
NOTE • Direct inguinal hernias result when the abdominal contents protrude
through the weak area of the posterior wall of the inguinal canal medial to
Direct hernias are found medial to the
the inferior epigastric vessels (in the inguinal [Hesselbach’s] triangle).
inferior epigastric vessels, and indirect
inguinal hernias occur lateral to the inferior
epigastric vessels.
92
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
– Direct hernias rupture through the posterior wall of the inguinal canal
and are usually found on the surface of the spermatic cord and bulge at
the superficial ring.
– They may be covered by only the external layer of spermatic fascia.
NOTE
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Both direct and indirect hernias exit through
Direct inguinal hernias usually pass through the inguinal (Hesselbach’s)
the superficial ring, but only indirect hernias
triangle:
pass through the deep ring.
• Lateral border: inferior epigastric vessels
• Medial border: rectus abdominis muscle
• Inferior border: inguinal ligament
Inferior epigastric
artery & vein
Indirect
Inguinal
triangle
Direct
Superficial inguinal ring
Figure II 3 5. Inguinal Hernia
Figure II 3 5. Inguinal Hernia
9
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
CLINICAL CORRELATE Femoral Hernias
Inguinal hernias pass above the inguinal Femoral hernias most often occur in women.
ligament, while femoral hernias pass
Pharmacolobgeylow it. Biochemistry
Inguinal ligament
Femoral vein
Femoral canal
Physiology MedicalGenetics Sartorius
Femoral sheath Femoral nerve Site of femoral
canal and hernia
contains femoral
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocaiartleSryc,iences vein, and canal Femoral artery Adductor longus
Microbiology
Figure II 3 6. Femoral Hernia
Figure II 3 6. Femoral Hernia
EMBRYOLOGY OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TUBE
Primitive Gut Tube
The primitive gut tube is formed by incorporation of the yolk sac into the embryo
during 2 body foldings: head to tail (cranial caudal) and lateral foldings. While
the epithelial lining of the mucosa of the primitive gut tube is derived from
endoderm, the lamina propria, muscularis mucosae, submucosa, muscularis
externa, and adventitia/serosa are derived from mesoderm.
The primitive gut tube is divided into the foregut, midgut, and hindgut, each
supplied by a specific artery and autonomic nerves.
9
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Table II 3 1. Adult Structures Derived from the 3 Divisions of the Primitive Gut Tube
Foregut Midgut Hindgut
Artery: celiac Artery: superior mesenteric Artery: inferior mesenteric
Parasympathetic innervation: Parasympathetic innervation: Parasympathetic innervation:
vagus nerves vagus nerves pelvic splanchnic nerves
Sympathetic innervation: Sympathetic innervation: Sympathetic innervation:
• Preganglionics: thoracic • Preganglionics: thoracic • Preganglionics: lumbar
splanchnic nerves, splanchnic nerves, splanchnic nerves, L1−L2
T5−T9 T9−T12
• Postganglionic cell
• Postganglionic cell • Postganglionic cell bodies: inferior mesen
bodies: celiac ganglion bodies: superior mesen teric ganglion
teric ganglion
Referred Pain: Epigastrium Referred Pain: Umbilical Referred Pain: Hypogastrium
Foregut Derivatives Midgut Derivatives Hindgut Derivatives
Esophagus Duodenum (second, third, and Transverse colon (distal
fourth parts) third—splenic flexure)
Stomach
Jejunum Descending colon
Duodenum (first and second
parts) Ileum Sigmoid colon
Liver Cecum Rectum
Pancreas Appendix Anal canal (above pectinate
line)
Biliary apparatus Ascending colon
Gallbladder Transverse colon (proximal
two thirds)
Development and Rotation of Foregut NOTE
After body foldings and the formation of the gut tube, the foregut is suspended The lower respiratory tract, liver and biliary
from the dorsal body wall by the dorsal embryonic mesentery and from the system, and pancreas all develop from an
ventral body wall by the ventral embryonic mesentery. Note that the liver
endodermal outgrowth of the foregut.
develops in the ventral embryonic mesentery, and the spleen and dorsal pancreatic
bud develop in the dorsal embryonic mesentery.
• The abdominal foregut rotates 90° (clockwise) around its longitudinal
axis. The original left side of the stomach before rotation becomes the
ventral surface after rotation and its anterior and posterior borders before
rotation will become the lesser and greater curvatures, respectively.
• Foregut rotation results in the liver, lesser omentum (ventral embryonic
mesentery), pylorus of the stomach, and duodenum moving to the right;
and the spleen, pancreas, and greater omentum (dorsal embryonic
mesentery) moving to the left.
• The ventral embryonic mesentery will contribute to the lesser omentum
and the falciform ligament, both of which attach to the liver.
• The dorsal embryonic mesentery will contribute to the greater omentum
and the gastro splenic and splenorenal ligaments, all of which attach to
the spleen or the greater curvature of the stomach.
9
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Pharmacology AmnioticBiochemistrycavity (AM)
Ectoderm
Pharyngeal
Mesoderm pouches
1 Esophagus
Endoderm
Physiology Yolk Med s i a c c alGene ( t Y ic S s ) Stomach 2 Lung bud
3 Aorta
Hepatic 4
diverticulum
Gallbladder
AM
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciencYesolk Foregut 90° rotation
stalk to right along
Lateral longitudinal axis
body fold
270° rotation
Vitelline Vitelline
YS counterclockwise
Microbiology duct duct Midgut
and herniation
Allantois (6–10th week)
Hindgut Septation
Cloaca
AM
Celiac artery
Coelom Inferior mesenteric artery Dorsal pancreatic bud
Gut tube
Superior mesenteric artery Ventral pancreatic bud
Figure II 3 7A. Development of Gastrointestinal Tract
Figure II 3 7A. Development of Gastrointestinal Tract
9
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Development of Liver
Aorta Dorsal embryonic mesentery Lesser Dorsal Aorta
omentum
Kidney
Kidney Mesentery
GI tract
Foregut
Peritoneum
Ventral Peritoneal
embryonic Falciform cavity
mesentery ligament Liver &
Ventral
1A 1B 1C biliary system
Development of Pancreas Development of Spleen
Dorsal Stomach Spleen
Splen
pancreatic
orenal
bud
ligament
Spleen
Ventral Gastro
pancreatic splenic
bud 2A 2B 3A 3B ligament
Secondary Retroperitonealization
Fusion fascia
4A 4B 4C
Rotation of Foregut
Epiploic
foramen
Lesser Splenorenal
sac* ligament
Greater
sac
Spleen
5A 5B
Lesser
Gastrosplenic ligament
*Lesser sac = omental bursa omentum
Figure FigureII 3II73B.7B. CCrorsosss SecStieocntiaolnal View oVfiewForegutof DFeovreelgouptment DeavnedlopmRenottation and Rotation
9
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Development and Rotation of Midgut
The midgut originally develops from the cranial and caudal intestinal loops. During
weeks 6–10, the midgut herniates into the umbilical cord. During herniation into
and return from the umbilical cord, the midgut undergoes a 270° counterclockwise
Pharmacology Biochemistry
rotation around the axis of the superior mesenteric artery.
• This rotation results in the jejunum being on the left, and the ileum and
cecum being on the right.
Physiology MedicalGenetics • It also causes the colon to assume the shape of an inverted “U.”
Peritoneum and Peritoneal Cavity
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences The peritoneum is the serous membrane related to the viscera of the abdominal
cavity. It is divided into 2 layers: parietal and visceral.
Dorsal
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Microbiology Aorta
Inflammation of the parietal peritoneum
(peritonitis) results in sharp pain that is
localized over the area.
Kidney
Dorsal
mesentery
Parietal peritoneum
GI tract
Visceral peritoneum
Peritoneal cavity
Ventral
Figure II F3igur7eC. IIP3erito7nCe.um Peritoneum
The parietal layer lines the body wall and covers the retroperitoneal organs on one
surface. Parietal peritoneum is very sensitive to somatic pain and is innervated by
the lower intercostal nerves and the ilioinguinal and the iliohypogastric nerves of
the lumbar plexus.
The visceral layer encloses the surfaces of the intraperitoneal organs. The visceral
peritoneum usually forms double layered peritoneal membranes (mesenteries)
that suspend parts of the GI tract from the body wall. The mesenteries allow for
the passage of vessels, nerves, and lymphatics to reach the GI tract.
Different terms describe the postnatal remnants of mesenteries in the abdomen:
• Omentum: lesser and greater omenta attach to the lesser or greater
curvatures of the stomach, respectively
• Mesocolon: transverse and sigmoid mesocolon attach to the transverse
colon or the sigmoid colon, respectively
• Ligaments: reflections of mesenteries between organs or the body wall,
named according to their attachments
9
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
The peritoneal cavity is the potential space located between the parietal and
visceral peritoneal layers. The 90° rotation and the shift of the embryonic mesen
teries divide the peritoneal cavity into 2 sacs (Figures II 3 7B and II 3 9).
• The lesser sac (omental bursa) is a cul de sac formed posterior to the
stomach and the lesser omentum
• The greater sac is formed by the larger area of the remaining peritoneal
cavity. The only communication between the lesser sac and the greater sac
is the epiploic foramen (of Winslow).
Intraperitoneal versus Retroperitoneal Organs
The abdominal viscera are classified according to their relationship to the
peritoneum.
• Intraperitoneal organs are suspended by a mesentery and are almost
completely enclosed in visceral peritoneum. They are mobile.
• Retroperitoneal organs are partially covered on one side with parietal
peritoneum. They are immobile or fixed. Many retroperitoneal organs are
originally suspended by a mesentery and become secondarily retroperito
neal. In secondary retroperitonealization, parts of the gut tube (most of
the duodenum, pancreas, ascending colon, descending colon, part of
rectum) fuse with the body wall by way of fusion of visceral peritoneum
with parietal peritoneum. This causes the organs to become secondarily
retroperitoneal (and the visceral peritoneum covering the organ is
renamed as the parietal peritoneum). The vessels within the mesentery of
these gut structures become secondarily retroperitoneal.
Table II 3 2. Intraperitoneal and Retroperitoneal Organs
Major Intraperitoneal Major Secondary Ret Major Primary
Organs (suspended by a roperitoneal Organs Retroperitoneal Organs
mesentery) (lost a mesentery (never had a mesentery)
during development)
Stomach Duodenum, 2nd and Kidneys
3rd parts
Liver and gallbladder Adrenal glands
Head, neck, and
Spleen Ureters
body of pancreas
Duodenum, 1st part Aorta
Ascending colon
Tail of pancreas Inferior vena cava
Descending colon
Jejunum Lower rectum
Upper rectum
Ileum Anal canal
Appendix
Transverse colon
Sigmoid colon
9
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
The epiploic foramen is the opening between omental bursa and greater
peritoneal sac. The boundaries are described as follows:
• Anteriorly: hepatoduodenal ligament and the hepatic portal vein
Pharmacology Biochemistry • Posteriorly: inferior vena cava
• Superiorly: caudate lobe of the liver
• Inferiorly: first part of the duodenum
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Falciform ligament (contains ligamentum teres of liver)
Pathology BehavioralScience/SociaGlaSlclbielnadcedser
Spleen
Liver
Microbiology
Stomach
Lesser curvature
Epiploic
Duo
foramen
de
um
Greater curvature
Ascending
Greater omentum Hepatogastric ligament Lesser
colon
Hepatoduodenal omentum
ligament
1. Common bile duct
2. Proper hepatic artery
3. Hepatic portal vein
Descending colon
Figure II 3 Fi8g.urePeritIoIne3al 8. PeritoneMalembraneMsembranes
100
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Portal Proper hepatic IVC: inferior vena cava
vein artery
A: aorta
Spl: spleen
Common
bile duct Greater peritoneal sac
Liver
Epiploic Lesser omentum
foramen
Gastrosplenic
Omental Stomach ligament
bursa
(lesser IVC A Splenorenal ligament
peritoneal
(contains tail of
sac) Spl
pancreas and distal
Kidney
splenic vessels)
Figure II 3 9. Greater Fiagnudre LIIess3er9. GreaPteerritoneaalnd Lesser SacsPeritoneal Sacs
DEVELOPMENT OF ABDOMINAL VISCERA
Liver
The hepatic diverticulum develops as an outgrowth of the endoderm of the
foregut in the region of the duodenum near the border between the foregut and
the midgut.
• This diverticulum enters the ventral embryonic mesentery and distally
becomes the liver and gallbladder and proximately becomes the biliary
duct system.
• The part of the ventral embryonic mesentery between the liver and gut
tube becomes the lesser omentum, and the part between the liver and
ventral body wall becomes the falciform ligament.
Pancreas
The pancreas develops from 2 pancreatic diverticula (buds), which evaginate
from the endodermal lining of the foregut in the region of duodenum.
• The ventral bud rotates around the gut tube to fuse with the dorsal bud,
together to form a single pancreas.
• The dorsal pancreatic bud forms the neck, body, and tail of the
pancreas.
• The ventral pancreatic bud forms the head and uncinate process.
10
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
CLINICAL CORRELATE
An annular pancreas (rare congenital
defect) is caused by a defect in the rotation
Pharmacologaynd fusion of the ventral and Bdioocrshaelmistrybuds.
Week 5
The result is constriction or obstruction of
the duodenum, with resulting
Gallbladder
polyhydramnios. Dorsal pancreas
Physiology MedicalGenetics Ventral pancreas (forms neck, body, tail)
(forms head, uncinate)
Duodenum
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Week 6
Accessory pancreatic duct
Common
bile duct
Microbiology
Main
pancreatic duct
Annular pancreas
(polyhydramnios)
Figure II 3 10. Development of the Pancreas and Duodenum
Figure II 3 10. Development of the Pancreas and Duodenum
Spleen
The spleen develops from mesoderm within the dorsal embryonic mesentery
(Figure II 3 7B). The embryonic mesentery between the spleen and the gut tube
becomes the gastrosplenic ligament. The mesentery between the spleen and the
dorsal body wall becomes the splenorenal ligament.
CONGENITAL ABNORMALITIES OF THE GUT TUBE
Hypertrophic pyloric stenosis occurs when the muscularis externa hypertrophies,
causing a narrow pyloric lumen. It is associated with polyhydramnios; projectile,
nonbilious vomiting; and a small knot at the right costal margin.
Extrahepatic biliary atresia occurs when the lumen of the biliary ducts is
occluded owing to incomplete recanalization. It is associated with jaundice,
white colored stool, and dark colored urine.
Annular pancreas occurs when the ventral and dorsal pancreatic buds form a ring
around the duodenum, thereby causing an obstruction of the duodenum and
polyhydramnios.
10
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Duodenal atresia occurs when the lumen of the duodenum is occluded owing to
failed recanalization. It is associated with polyhydramnios, bile containing
vomitus, and a distended stomach.
An omphalocele occurs when the midgut loop fails to return to the abdominal
cavity and remains in the umbilical stalk. The viscera herniate through the
umbilical ring and are contained in a shiny sac of amnion at the base of the
umbilical cord. It is often associated with multiple anomalies of the heart and
nervous system, with a high mortality rate (25%).
Gastroschisis occurs when the abdominal viscera herniate through the body wall
directly into the amniotic cavity, usually to the right of the umbilicus.
• This is a defect in the closure of the lateral body folds and a weakness of
the anterior wall.
• Note that the viscera do not protrude through the umbilical ring and are
not enclosed in a sac of amnion.
Ileal (Meckel) diverticulum occurs when a remnant of the vitelline duct persists,
thereby forming a blind pouch on the antimesenteric border of the ileum. It is
often asymptomatic but can become inflamed if it contains ectopic gastric,
pancreatic, or endometrial tissue, which may produce ulceration. It is typically
found 2 feet from the ileocecal junction, are 2 inches long, and appears in 2% of
the population.
Vitelline fistula occurs when the vitelline duct persists, thereby forming a direct
connection between the intestinal lumen and the outside of the body at the
umbilicus. It is associated with drainage of meconium from the umbilicus.
Malrotation of midgut occurs when the midgut undergoes only partial rotation
and results in abnormal position of abdominal viscera. It may be associated with
volvulus (twisting of intestines).
Colonic aganglionosis (Hirschsprung disease) results from the failure of neural
crest cells to form the myenteric plexus in the sigmoid colon and rectum. It is
associated with loss of peristalsis and immobility of the hindgut, fecal retention
and abdominal distention of the transverse colon (megacolon).
ABDOMINAL VISCERA
Liver
The liver has 2 surfaces: a superior or diaphragmatic surface and an inferior or a
visceral surface. It lies mostly in the right aspect of the abdominal cavity and is
protected by the rib cage. The liver is invested by visceral peritoneum:
• The reflection of visceral peritoneum between the diaphragmatic surface
of the liver and the diaphragm forms the falciform ligament, which
continues onto the liver as the coronary ligament and the right and left
triangular ligaments.
• The extension of visceral peritoneum between the visceral surface of the
liver and the first part of the duodenum and the lesser curvature of the
stomach forms the hepatoduodenal and hepatogastric ligaments of the
lesser omentum, respectively.
10
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
The liver is divided into 2 lobes of unequal size:
• Fissures for the ligamentum teres and the ligamentum venosum, the porta
hepatis, and the fossa for the gallbladder further subdivide the right lobe into
Pharmacology Biochemistry the right lobe proper, the quadrate lobe, and the caudate lobe.
• The quadrate and caudate lobes are anatomically part of the right lobe but
functionally part of the left. They receive their blood supply from the left
branches of the portal vein and hepatic artery and secrete bile to the left
hepatic duct.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
The liver has a central hilus, or porta hepatis, which receives venous blood from
the portal vein and arterial blood from the hepatic artery.
• The central hilus also transmits the common bile duct, which collects bile
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
produced by the liver.
• These structures, known collectively as the portal triad, are located in the
hepatoduodenal ligament, which is the right free border of the lesser
omentum.
Microbiology
The hepatic veins drain the liver by collecting blood from the liver sinusoids and
returning it to the inferior vena cava.
Ligamentum Hepatic vein
venosum
Inferior
Caudate vena cava
lobe
Left lobe
Proper
Common
hepatic
bile duc
artery
Right lobe
Hepatic
portal
vein
Quadrate
Ligamentum
lobe
teres of liver
Gallbladder
Figure II 3 11. Visceral Surface of the Liver
Figure II 3 11. Visceral Surface of the Liver
Gallbladder
The gallbladder lies in a fossa on the visceral surface of the liver to the right of the
quadrate lobe. It stores and concentrates bile, which enters and leaves through the
cystic duct.
• The cystic duct joins the common hepatic duct to form the common bile
duct.
• The common bile duct descends in the hepatoduodenal ligament, then passes
posterior to the first part of the duodenum. The common bile duct penetrates
104
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
the head of the pancreas where it joins the main pancreatic duct and forms
the hepatopancreatic ampulla, which drains into the second part of the
duodenum at the major duodenal papilla.
Right and left
hepatic ducts
Common hepatic duct
Liver
Cystic duct
Pyloric antrum
Pylorus
Body Common bile duct
Fundus of Main pancreatic duct of Wirsung
gallbladder
Hepatopancreatic ampulla of Vater
Duodenum
Major duodenal papilla
(Sphincter of Oddi)
F Figure II 3 12. Biliary Ducts
igure II 3 12. Biliary Ducts
Pancreas
The pancreas horizontally crosses the posterior abdominal wall at approximately at
the level of the transpyloric plane. The gland consists of 4 parts: head, neck, body,
and tail.
• The head of the pancreas rests within the C shaped area formed by the
duodenum and is traversed by the common bile duct. It includes the
uncinate process which is crossed by the superior mesenteric vessels.
• Posterior to the neck is the site of formation of the hepatic portal vein.
• The body passes to the left and passes anterior to the aorta and the left
kidney. The splenic artery undulates along the superior border of the body
of the pancreas with the splenic vein coursing posterior to the body.
• The tail of the pancreas enters the splenorenal ligament to reach the
hilum of the spleen. The tail is the only part of the pancreas that is
intraperitoneal.
The main pancreatic duct (Figures II 3 12 and II 3 13) courses through the body CLINICAL CORRELATE
and tail of the pancreas to reach the head of the pancreas, where it joins with the
Carcinoma of the pancreas commonly occurs
common bile duct to form the hepatopancreatic ampulla.
in the head of the pancreas and may
The head of the pancreas receives its blood supply from the superior and inferior constrict the main pancreatic duct and the
pancreaticoduodenal branches of the gastroduodenal and superior mesenteric
common bile duct. Obstruction of the bile
arteries, respectively. This region is important for collateral circulation because
duct may cause jaundice.
there are anastomoses between these branches of the celiac trunk and superior
mesenteric artery.
10
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
The neck, body, and tail of the pancreas receive their blood supply from the
splenic artery.
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Hepatic
portal vein Main pancreatic duct (of Wirsung)
Common
bile duct
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Right
suprarenal Spleen
gland
Right
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences kidney 2nd
Tail
3rd Body
Microbiology Pancreas
Neck
Duodenum Head
Superior mesenteric
artery and vein
Figure II 3 13. Adult Pancreas
Figure II 3 13. Adult Pancreas
CLINICAL CORRELATE Spleen
The spleen may be lacerated with a fracture The spleen is a peritoneal organ in the upper left quadrant that is deep to the left
of the 9th, 10th, or 11th rib on the left 9th, 10th, and 11th ribs. The visceral surface of the spleen is in contact with the left
colic flexure, stomach, and left kidney. Inasmuch as the spleen lies above the costal
side.
margin, a normal sized spleen is not palpable.
The splenic artery and vein reach the hilus of the spleen by traversing the
splenorenal ligament.
CLINICAL CORRELATE Stomach
Asliding hiatal hernia occurs when the The stomach has a right lesser curvature, which is connected to the porta hepatis
cardia of the stomach herniates through the of the liver by the lesser omentum (hepatogastric ligament), and a left greater
curvature from which the greater omentum is suspended (Figure II 3 8).
esophageal hiatus of the diaphragm. This
can damage the vagal trunks as they pass
The cardiac region receives the esophagus; and the dome shaped upper portion of
through the hiatus. the stomach, which is normally filled with air, is the fundus. The main central part
of the stomach is the body. The pyloric portion of the stomach has a thick muscu
lar wall and narrow lumen that empties into the duodenum approximately in the
transpyloric plane (L1 vertebra).
Duodenum
The duodenum is C shaped, has 4 parts, and is located retroperitoneal except for
the first part.
10
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
• The first part is referred to as the duodenal cap (bulb). The gastroduodenal
artery and the common bile duct descend posterior to the first part.
• The second part (descending) receives the common bile duct and main
pancreatic duct at the hepatopancreatic ampulla (of Vater). Smooth muscle
in the wall of the duodenal papilla is known as the sphincter of Oddi.
Note that the foregut terminates at the point of entry of the common bile duct; the
remainder of the duodenum is part of the midgut.
Jejunum and Ileum
The jejunum begins at the duodenojejunal junction and comprises 2/5 of the
remaining small intestine. The beginning of the ileum is not clearly demarcated; it
consists of the distal 3/5 of the small bowel.
The jejunoileum is suspended from the posterior body wall by the mesentery
proper. Although the root of the mesentery is only 6 inches long, the mobile part
of the small intestine is approximately 22 feet in length.
Colon
The cecum is the first part of the colon, or large intestine, and begins at the
ileocecal junction. It is a blind pouch, which often has a mesentery and gives rise
to the vermiform appendix. The appendix has its own mesentery, the
mesoappendix.
The ascending colon lies retroperitoneally and lacks a mesentery. It is continuous
with the transverse colon at the right (hepatic) flexure of colon.
The transverse colon has its own mesentery called the transverse mesocolon. It
becomes continuous with the descending colon at the left (splenic) flexure of
colon. The midgut terminates at the junction of the proximal two thirds and distal
one third of the transverse colon.
The descending colon lacks a mesentery. It joins the sigmoid colon where the
large bowel crosses the pelvic brim.
The sigmoid colon is suspended by the sigmoid mesocolon. It is the terminal
portion of the large intestine and enters the pelvis to continue as the rectum.
The superior one third of the rectum is covered by peritoneum anteriorly and
laterally. It is the fixed, terminal, straight portion of the hindgut.
The anal canal is about 1.5 inches long and opens distally at the anus. It is
continuous with the rectum at the pelvic diaphragm, where it makes a 90 degree
posterior bend (anorectal flexure) below the rectum.
• The puborectalis component of the pelvic diaphragm pulls the flexure
forward, helping to maintain fecal continence.
• The internal anal sphincter is circular smooth muscle that surrounds the
anal canal. The sympathetics (lumbar splanchnics) increase the tone of
the muscle and the parasympathetics (pelvic splanchnics) relax the
muscle during defecation.
10
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
• The external anal sphincter is circular voluntary skeletal muscle sur
rounding the canal that is voluntarily controlled by the inferior rectal
branch of the pudendal nerve and relaxes during defecation.
• The anal canal is divided into upper and lower parts separated by the
Pharmacology Biochemistry
pectinate line, an elevation of the mucous membrane at the distal ends of
the anal columns.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Table II 3 3. Comparison of Features Above and Below the Pectinate Line
Above Below
Visceral (ANS) sensory innervation Somatic sensory innervation
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Portal venous drainage Caval venous drainage
Drain to iliac lymph nodes Drain to superficial inguinal nodes
Internal hemorrhoids (painless) External hemorrhoids (painful)
Microbiology
Endoderm Ectoderm
Abbreviations: ANS, autonomic nervous system
GASTROINTESTINAL HISTOLOGY
The alimentary or gastrointestinal (GI) tract is a muscular tube that runs from the
oral cavity to the anal canal. The GI tract walls are composed of 4 layers: mucosa,
submucosa, muscularis externa, and serosa.
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permission.CoMpycrGigrhatw Hill Companies. Used with permission.
Figure FigurIeI 3 II143. 14.OrgOanrgizaantiizoantion of tohfe tGheI tracGtI tract
Mucosa M(Muc)osa sub(mMu)cosasubmucosa (SB()S,B), mmuussccuulalarirsis externaextern(aME), (ME),
serosa soerrosavisceroarl visceralperitopneeruitmoneum (S()S,),mesenmteersyentery (arrow) (arrow)
10
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Mucosa
The mucosa is the innermost layer and has 3 components.
• The epithelium lining the lumen varies in different regions, depending on
whether the function is primarily conductive and protective (stratified
squamous; in the pharynx and esophagus), or secretory and absorptive
(simple columnar; stomach and intestine).
• The lamina propria is a layer of areolar connective tissue that supports
the epithelium and attaches it to the underlying muscularis mucosae.
Numerous capillaries form extensive networks in the lamina propria
(particularly in the small intestine).
Within the lamina propria are blind ended lymphatic vessels (lacteals)
that carry out absorbed nutrients and white blood cells (particularly
lymphocytes). The GALT (gut associated lymphoid tissue), responsible for
IgA production, is located within the lamina propria.
• The muscularis mucosa is a thin smooth muscle layer that marks the
innermost edge of the mucosa. The muscle confers some motility to the
mucosa and facilitates discharge of secretions from glands. In the small
intestine, a few strands of smooth muscle may run into the lamina propria
and up to the tips of villi.
Submucosa
The submucosa is a layer of loose areolar connective tissue that attaches the
mucosa to the muscularis externa and houses the larger blood vessels and mucous
secreting glands.
Muscularis Externa
The muscularis externa is usually comprised of 2 layers of muscle: an inner
circular and an outer longitudinal. The muscularis externa controls the lumen size
and is responsible for peristalsis. The muscle is striated in the upper third of the
esophagus and smooth elsewhere.
Serosa
The serosa (or peritoneum of anatomy) is composed of a mesothelium (a thin
epithelium lining the thoracic and abdominal cavities) and loose connective tissue.
In the abdominal cavity, the serosa surrounds each intestinal loop and then doubles CLINICAL CORRELATE
to form the mesentery within which run blood and lymphatic vessels.
Hirschsprung disease or aganglionic
megacolon is a genetic disease seen in ~1
per 5,000 live births. It may result from
INNERVATION mutations that affect the migration of neural
The GI tract has both intrinsic and extrinsic innervation. The intrinsic innerva crest cells into the gut. This results in a
tion is entirely located within the walls of the GI tract. The intrinsic system is deficiency of terminal ganglion cells in
capable of autonomous generation of peristalsis and glandular secretions. An Auerbach’s plexus and affects digestive tract
interconnected network of ganglia and nerves located in the submucosa forms the
motility, particularly in the rectum
Meissner’s plexus and controls much of the intrinsic motility of the lining of the
(peristalsis is not as effective and
alimentary tract. Auerbach’s plexus contains a second network of neuronal ganglia,
constipation results).
and is located between the 2 muscle layers of the muscularis externa. All GI tract
smooth muscle is interconnected by gap junctions.
10
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
The extrinsic autonomic innervation to the GI tract is from the parasympathetic
(stimulatory) and sympathetic (inhibitory) axons that modulate the activity of the
intrinsic innervation. Sensory fibers accompany the parasympathetic nerves and
mediate visceral reflexes and sensations, such as hunger and rectal fullness.
Pharmacology Biochemistry Visceral pain fibers course back to the CNS with the sympathetic innervation.
Pain results from excessive contraction and/or distention of the
smooth muscle. Visceral pain is referred to the body wall dermatomes that match
the sympathetic innervation to that GI tract structure.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
IMMUNE FUNCTIONS
The lumen of the GI tract is normally colonized by abundant bacterial flora. The
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences majority of the bacteria in the body—comprising about 500 different species—are
in our gut, where they enjoy a rich growth medium within a long, warm tube.
Most of these bacteria are beneficial (vitamins B12 and K production, additional
digestion, protection against pathogenic bacteria) but a few species of pathogenic
microbes appear at times. The gut has defense mechanisms to fight these patho
Microbiology
gens (GALT and Paneth cells).
REGIONAL DIFFERENCES
Major differences lie in the general organization of the mucosa (glands, folds, villi,
etc.) and in the types of cells comprising the epithelia and associated glands in the
GI tract.
Figure II 3 15. Histologic Organization of the Digestive Tube
11
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Table II 3 4. Histology of Specific Regions
Region Major Characteristics Mucosal Cell Types at Function of Surface Mucosal Cells
Surface
Esophagus • Nonkeratinized — —
stratified squamous
epithelium
• Skeletal muscle in
muscularis externa
(upper 1/3)
• Smooth muscle
(lower 1/3)
Stomach Rugae: shallow pits; Mucous cells Secrete mucous; form protective layer
deep glands against acid; tight junctions between
(body and
these cells probably contribute to the
fundus)
acid barrier of the epithelium.
Chief cells Secrete pepsinogen and lipase
precursor
Parietal cells Secrete HCl and intrinsic factor
Enteroendocrine Secrete a variety of peptide hormones
(EE) cells
Pylorus Deep pits; shallow, Mucous cells Same as above
branched glands
Parietal cells Same as above
EE cells High concentration of gastrin
Small Villi, plicae, and crypts Columnar Contain numerous microvilli that greatly
intestine absorptive cells increase the luminal surface area,
facilitating absorption
Duodenum Brunner glands, which Goblet cells Secrete acid glycoproteins that protect
discharge alkaline mucosal linings
secretion
Paneth cells Contains granules that contain
lysozyme. May play a role in regulating
intestinal flora
EE cells High concentration of cells that secrete
cholecystokinin and secretin
Jejunum Villi, well developed Same cell types as Same as above
plica, crypts found in the duode
nal epithelium
Ileum Aggregations of lymph M cells found over Endocytose and transport antigen from
nodules called Peyer’s lymphatic nodules the lumen to lymphoid cells
patches and Peyer’s patches
Large Lacks villi, crypts Mainly Transport Na+ (actively) and water
intestine mucous secreting (passively) out of lumen
and absorptive cells
11
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Oral Cavity
The epithelium of the oral cavity is a stratified squamous epithelium. Mucous and
serous secretions of the salivary glands lubricate food, rinse the oral cavity,
moisten the food for swallowing and provide partial antibacterial protection.
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Secretions of IgA from plasma cells within the connective tissue are transported
through the gland epithelia to help protect against microbial attachment and
invasion.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Esophagus
The esophagus is also lined by a stratified squamous epithelium. In the lower part
of the esophagus there is an abrupt transition to the simple columnar epithelium
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences of the stomach. Langerhans cells—macrophage like antigen presenting cells—are
present in the epithelial lining. The muscularis externa of the esophagus consists of
striated muscle in the upper third, smooth muscle in the distal third, and a
combination of both in the middle third.
Microbiology
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permission.CoMpycrGigrahwt Hill Companies. Used with permission.
FigurFeigureII 3 16I.I E3soph1a5g.us Esophwagituhs non keratinwiziitnhg nonstratifiekderatinizisnqguamous estpriatthifeileiudm (asrrqouwam)ous and a thin
epithelium (arrow) andlaminaa thpirnopria laminwaith vessperlsopria (arrowhewaditsh) vessels (arrowheads)
The underlying The undmerulsycinuglaris muscularisexternaexterna (M(ME)E) isisskeslektealletal musclemuscle from
the froumpperthe uphpaelrf haolff otfhetheesoespohpahgaugsus
Stomach
The stomach has 3 distinct histological areas: the cardia, body, and pyloric antrum.
The mucosa of the stomach is thrown into folds (rugae) when empty, but
disappears when the stomach is full. The surface is lined by a simple columnar
epithelium. The stomach begins digestion by initiating the chemical and enzymatic
breakdown of ingested food. Proteins are initially denatured by the acidic gastric
juice before being hydrolyzed to polypeptide fragments by the enzyme pepsin. The
chyme consists of denatured and partially broken up food particles suspended in a
semi fluid, highly acidic medium.
11
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Gastric pits form numerous deep tubular invaginations that line the inner surface of
the stomach. The gastric pits are closely spaced; they penetrate into the thickness of
the mucosa and extend into gastric glands. The transition between pits and glands is
marked by the isthmus, where there is a narrowing of the lumen, and by a change in
cellular composition of the epithelium. The glands are coiled in the cardiac and
pyloric regions of the stomach and straight in the fundus and body regions. Glands
in the body of the stomach deliver gastric juice (containing HCl and enzymes, renin
and lipase) to each pit, and from there to the stomach lumen. There are about
5 million glands in the stomach, secreting some 2 liters of fluid per day.
Mucous secreting cells are located on the inner surface of the stomach, in the pit and
in the neck, the transitional region between pits and glands. These cells produce a
thick layer of mucous which covers and protects the stomach, falling into 2 categories:
the surface mucous is composed of neutral glycoproteins, while the mucous secreted
by the neck mucous cells is composed of acidic glycoproteins. In cardiac and pyloric
regions, mucous cells are also the major cell type in the glands.
Copyright McGraw HillCompanies. Used with permiMssicoGnr.CawopyrightHill Companies. Used with permission.
Figure FIIigur3e 16.II 3Ca1rd7i.a Cardiapcart parotf tohfe thestomstoacmhach wwitihth gasgtraisctric pits pits and
coiled gastric glands.
and coiled gastric glands.
Stem cSetellms cetlhlast tharetgenereragteenerate aallll stostmomacahch cells celalsre loacraeted located
at tahtetheisthismthumsus (a(rarrorwowhehaeda)d)
Oxyntic or parietal cells secrete 0.1N HCl into the stomach lumen and bicarbonate CLINICAL CORRELATE
ions into the lamina propria (a byproduct of the acid production) in response to
Acetylcholine and gastrin increase HCL
histamine, gastrin, and acetylcholine. These cells also secrete intrinsic factor (a glyco
secretion by parietal cells. Histamine
protein necessary for absorption of vitamin B12). Vitamin B12 is required for
potentiates both by binding to the histamine
production of erythrocytes; deficiencies result in pernicious anemia and a disruption
of peripheral and central nervous system myelin (see subacute combined degenera H2 receptor. Cimetidine and H2 antagonists
tion in Neuroscience section). inhibit histamine.
Parietal cells, located in the upper regions of the gastric glands, have a broader
base and narrower apex. Their structure varies greatly depending on their
functional state.
11
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
CLINICAL CORRELATE Chief or peptic cells secrete pepsinogen, an enzyme precursor that is stored in
secretory (zymogen) granules before its induced secretion. Pepsinogen is inactive
Infection by Helicobacter pylori affects the
and protects the peptic cells from autodigestion. Low pH, in the stomach lumen,
gastric mucosal lining and allows pepsin,
converts pepsinogen to pepsin.
PharmacologHyCl, and proteases to erode thBeiochemmuicsotrsya.
Hematemesis and melena are common
clinical findings.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Microbiology
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permission.CoMpycrGigrahwt Hill Companies. Used with permission.
Figure FIIigur3e 17I.I 3St1o8m.achStomach nenaerar ththee basebaseof gasotfric gastgrilcands glands
Pale stainingPale stainpianrgietal parietalcellscells (A()A) aanndd chicehfief cells cel(lBs) are(B)shownar.e shown.
The enteroendocrine cells or APUD cells (amine precursor uptake and decarbox
ylation) are present throughout the GI tract and are also found in the respiratory
tract. They constitute a diffuse neuroendocrine system that collectively accounts
for more cells than all other endocrine organs in the body. Enteroendocrine cells
are dispersed throughout the GI tract so that they can receive and transmit local
signals.
The stem cells responsible for the regeneration of all types of cells in the stomach
epithelium are located in the isthmus. Their mitotic rate can be influenced by the
presence of gastrin and by damage (aspirin, alcohol, bile salt reflux). Renewal of
many gastric epithelial cells occurs every 4–7 days.
• Although the stem cells are capable of differentiating into any of the
stomach cell types, there is evidence that the position of the cell along the
gland influences its fate.
• In contrast to the short life span (4–5 days) of the cells near the acidic
environment, the chief cells—deep within the glands—may have a life
span >190 days.
Small Intestine
The small intestine is tubular in shape and has a total length of about 21 feet. The
effective internal surface area of the small intestine is greatly increased by the
plicae circulares, villi and microvilli.
11
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Plicae circulares (circular folds or valves of Kerckring) are foldings of the inner
surface that involve both mucosa and sub mucosa. Plicae circulares increase the
surface area by a factor of 3.
Villi arise above the muscularis mucosae and they include the lamina propria and
epithelium of the mucosa. Villi increase the surface area by a factor of 10.
Microvilli of the absorptive epithelial cells increase the surface area by a factor of
20–30. The surface area of microvilli is increased even further by the presence of
surface membrane glycoproteins, constituting the glycocalyx to which enzymes are
bound.
The luminal surface of the small intestine is perforated by the openings of numer
ous tubular invaginations (the crypts of Lieberkühn) analogous to the glands of
the stomach. The crypts penetrate through the lamina propria and reach the
muscularis mucosae.
The small intestine completes digestion, absorbs the digested food constituents
(amino acids, monosaccharides, fatty acids), and transports them into blood and
lymphatic vessels.
The duodenum is the proximal pyloric end of the small intestine. Distal to the
duodenum is the jejunum, and then the ileum.
In the small intestine, the chyme from the stomach is mixed with mucosal cell
secretions, exocrine pancreatic juice, and bile.
Striated border
Capillary (shown
with red blood cell)
Lymphatic lacteal Villus
Goblet cells
Myofibroblast
Cryp Stem
Enterocytes
cells
Paneth cells
Smooth muscle
Lamina
propria
Muscularis mucosae
FigureFigure IIII33181.9. SSmmaallll IntesItnitneestine MucosalMucoHsaisltology Histology
115
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
CLINICAL CORRELATE Mucous production occurs in surface epithelial cells throughout the GI tract, by
Brunner glands in the duodenum and goblet cells in the mucosa throughout the
Any compromise of the mucous protection
intestine.
can lead to significant damage and irritation
Pharmacologoyf the gastrointestinal tract, leBaidoicnhgemistryto Mucous functions include lubrication of the GI tract, binding bacteria, and
gastritis, duodenitis, or even peptic ulcer trapping immunoglobulins where they have access to pathogens.
disease.
The rate of mucous secretion is increased by cholinergic stimulation, chemical
irritation, and physical irritation.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
In the duodenum, the acidic chyme from the stomach is neutralized by the neutral
or alkaline mucous secretions of glands located in the submucosal or Brunner’s
glands. The duodenum also receives digestive enzymes and bicarbonate from the
pancreas and bile from the liver (via gallbladder) through the bile duct, continuing
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences the digestive process.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
MicrobiologPyeristalsis is activated by the
parasympathetic system. For those suffering
from decreased intestinal motility
manifesting as constipation (paralytic ileus,
diabetic gastroparesis), dopaminergic and
cholinergic agents are often used (e.g.,
metoclopramide).
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permission.CoMpycrGigrahwt Hill Companies. Used with permission.
Figure II 3 19.FiguDreuodenIuIm3 20. Duodwenituhm villiwith(cuvrvileldi (curvedarrowa)rrow) aanndd submucosal
subBmruucnonsearl Bgrulannndesr glan(adrsrow)(arrow)
Patches oPfatchlyemsphaticof lymphatictissue tissue areare iinn ththee lamlainmaina propriapropr(iaarrowheads()a.rrowheads).
In the jejunum, the digestion process continues via enterocyte produced enzymes
and absorbs food products. The plicae circulares are best developed here. In the
ileum, a major site of immune reactivity, the mucosa is more heavily infiltrated
with lymphocytes and the accompanying antigen presenting cells than the
duodenum and jejunum. Numerous primary and secondary lymphatic nodules
(Peyer’s patches) are always present in the ileum’s mucosa, though their location is
not fixed in time. In the infant, maternal IgGs that are ingested are recognized by
the Fc receptors in microvilli and endocytosed to provide passive immunity. In the
adult, only trace amounts of intact proteins are transferred from lumen to lamina
propria, but IgAs produced in GALT in the ileum are transported in the opposite
direction into the lumen.
11
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Throughout the small intestine, the simple columnar intestinal epithelium has NOTE
5 types of differentiated cells, all derived from a common pool of stem cells.
Histologically, the duodenum contains
• Goblet cells secrete mucous that protects the surface of the intestine with submucosal Brunner’s glands, and the ileum
a viscous fluid consisting of glycoproteins (20% peptides, 80% contains Peyer’s patches in the lamina
carbohydrates). propria. The jejunum can be easily
• Enterocytes have 2 major functions. Enterocytes participate in the final recognized because it has neither Brunner’s
digestion steps and they absorb the digested food (in the form of amino glands nor Peyer’s patches.
acids, monosaccharides, and emulsified fats) by transporting it from the
lumen of the intestine to the lamina propria, where it is carried away by
blood vessels and lymphatics.
• Paneth cells are cells located at the base of the crypts, especially in the
jejunum and ileum; they contain visible acidophilic secretory granules
located in the apical region of the cells. These cells protect the body
against pathogenic microorganisms by secreting lysozyme and defensins
(or cryptdins) that destroy bacteria. Their life span is about 20 days.
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used withMcGperarmwission.CHoipllyrigChtompanies. Used with permission.
Figure IFIigu3re 20.II 3Ce2ll1s. Cellast atthethe babsaese ofofcrycprytspts of LieobferküLhineberkühninclude include
Paneth cPealnlseth (Ace)lls w(iAth) withlargelarge apaipciaclal grgarnaunluesles of lysozoyfme,lysozymaned, and
an adjaceannt adjacentstem stem cellcell (c(ciricrclele)) unduenrdgeorignoging mitosis. mitosis.
• Enteroendocrine cells of the small and large intestine, like those of the
stomach, secrete hormones that control the function of the GI tracts and
associated organs. They are located in the lower half of the crypts and are
detectable by silver based stains.
• Stem cells are located in the crypts, about one third of the way up from
the bottom. Their progeny differentiates into all the other cell types. The
epithelial lining of the small intestine, particularly that covering the
villi, completely renews itself every 5 days (or longer, during starvation).
The newly created cells (goblet, enterocytes, and enteroendocrine cells)
migrate up from the crypts, while the cells at the tips of microvilli
undergo apoptosis and slough off. There is also a group of fibroblasts that
11
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
accompany these epithelial cells as they move toward the tips of the villi.
Other cells move to the base of the crypts, replenishing the population of
Paneth and enteroendocrine cells.
Gut associated lymphatic tissue (GALT): Throughout the intestine, the lamina
Pharmacology Biochemistry
propria is heavily infiltrated with macrophages and lymphocytes. Peyer’s patches
are patches of GALT that are prominent in the ileum. M cells in the epithelium
transport luminal antigens to their base, where they are detected by B lymphocytes
and taken up by antigen presenting macrophages.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Microbiology
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permission.MCocpGyrraigwht Hill Companies. Used with permission.
Figure II 3 22. FIilgeuurme withIIPe3yer’s21. patcIlheeusm (arwroiwth) aPnadyer’scentral palatcchteeasls (arro(warhreoawd)s) anind the lamina
central lacteals (arrowheads)propria of thien vitlhlie lamina propria of the villi
Large Intestine
The large intestine includes the cecum (with appendix), ascending, transverse,
and descending colon, sigmoid colon, rectum, and anus. The large intestine has a
wide lumen, strong musculature, and longitudinal muscle that is separated into 3
strands, the teniae coli. The inner surface has no plicae and no villi but consists of
short crypts of Lieberkühn.
General features
• The colon is larger in diameter and shorter in length than is the small
intestine. Fecal material moves from the cecum, through the colon
(ascending, transverse, descending, and sigmoid colons), rectum, and
anal canal.
• Three longitudinal bands of muscle, the teniae coli, constitute the outer
layer. Because the colon is longer than these bands, pouching occurs,
creating haustra between the teniae and giving the colon its characteristic
“caterpillar” appearance.
11
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
• The mucosa has no villi, and mucous is secreted by short, inward project
ing colonic glands.
• Abundant lymphoid follicles are found in the cecum and appendix, and
more sparsely elsewhere.
• The major functions of the colon are reabsorption of fluid and electro
lytes and temporary storage of feces.
Defecation
Rectal distention with feces activates intrinsic and cord reflexes that cause
relaxation of the internal anal sphincter (smooth muscle) and produce the urge to
defecate. If the external anal sphincter (skeletal muscle innervated by the puden
dal nerve) is then voluntarily relaxed, and intra abdominal pressure is increased
via the Valsalva maneuver, defecation occurs. If the external sphincter is held
contracted, the urge to defecate temporarily diminishes.
Throughout the large intestine, the epithelium contains goblet, absorptive, and
enteroendocrine cells. Unlike the small intestine, about half of the epithelial cells
are mucous secreting goblet cells, providing lubrication. The major function of the
large intestine is fluid retrieval. Some digestion is still occurring, mainly the
breakdown of cellulose by the permanent bacterial flora. Stem cells are in the lower
part of the crypts.
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permission.CoMpcyGrigrahwt Hill Companies. Used with permission.
FigFuirgeure II 3 2I3I. 3Lar2g2e. intLeastrignee winitthestincerypts butwithno vcilrlyiptsand mbanuyt lnigoht vsitlaliiningand goblmetany cells
light staining goblet interspecreslelsd intearmspoenrgsed enterocytes among enterocytes
11
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
GASTROINTESTINAL GLANDS
Salivary Glands
Pharmacology Biochemistry
The major salivary glands are all branched tubuloalveolar glands, with secretory
acini that drain into ducts, which drain into the oral cavity. Acini contain serous,
mucous, or both types of secretory cells, as well as myoepithelial cells, both
surrounded by a basal lamina. Serous cells secrete various proteins and enzymes.
Mucous cells secrete predominantly glycosylated mucins.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Table II 3 5. Gastrointestinal Glands
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Salivary glands • Produce approximately 1.5 L/day of saliva
Submandibular • Presence of food in the mouth; the taste,
smell, sight, or thought of food; or the
Parotid
stimulation of vagal afferents at the distal
Sublingual
end of the esophagus increase production
Microbiology
of saliva
Functions • Initial triglyceride digestion (lingual lipase)
• Initial starch digestion (α amylase)
• Lubrication
Regulation Parasympathetic ↑ synthesis and
secretion of watery
saliva via muscarinic
receptor stimulation;
(anticholinergics →
dry mouth)
Sympathetic ↑ synthesis and
secretion of viscous
saliva via β adrenergic
receptor stimulation
The ducts that drain the glands increase in size and are lined by an epithelium that
transitions from cuboidal to columnar to pseudostratified to stratified columnar
cells. The smallest ducts, intercalated ducts, have myoepithelial cells; the next
larger ducts, striated ducts, have columnar cells with basal striations, caused by
basal infolding of cell membranes between prominent mitochondria. These
columnar cells make the saliva hypotonic by transporting Na and Cl ions out of
saliva back into the blood.
12
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permission.CoMpycrGigrhatw Hill Companies. Used with permission.
Figure FigIIure3 2I3I.3 2S4.ubmSanudbimbuanladribular withwitha mixa omfixlightofstailniginhgt smtauicnoinugs acinimucus
acini (arrow) (arrow) adjaacdejnatcent totodardkark staininsgtainingserous searcoiunsi acini
Small vessels (arrowheads)
Small vessels (arrowheads)
• The parotid glands lie on the surface of the masseter muscles in the CLINICAL CORRELATE
lateral face, in front of each external auditory meatus. The parotids are
The parotid gland is the major site of the
entirely serous salivary glands that drain inside each cheek through
mumps and rabies viruses that are
Stensen’s ducts which open above the second upper molar tooth. The
parotid glands contribute 25% of the volume of saliva. transmitted in saliva.
• The submandibular glands lie inside the lower edge of the mandible, and Benign tumors most frequently appear at the
are mixed serous/mucous glands with a predominance of serous cells. parotid gland; their removal is complicated
They drain in the floor of the mouth near the base of the tongue through
by the facial nerve traversing the gland.
Wharton’s ducts. The submandibular glands contribute 70% of the
volume of saliva.
• The sublingual glands lie at the base of the tongue, and are also mixed
serous/mucous glands with a predominance of mucous cells. They drain
into the mouth through multiple small ducts. The sublingual glands
contribute 5% of the volume of saliva.
Exocrine Pancreas
The pancreas is a branched tubuloacinar exocrine gland with acini. The acini are
composed of secretory cells that produce multiple digestive enzymes including
proteases, lipases, and amylases. Acinar cells are functionally polarized, with
basophilic RER at their basal ends below the nucleus, and membrane bound,
enzyme containing eosinophilic zymogen granules toward their apex.
The endocrine producing cells of the islets of Langerhans are embedded within
the exocrine pancreas.
12
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Microbiology
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permission.CoMpycrGigrhatw Hill Companies. Used with permission.
Figure IIFig3ure24. IIP3anc2r5ea.s Pancreas withwith lilgighhtt sstatainininingg islets isleotsf LangeorfhansLangerhans
(arrows) surrounded(arrows) subrryoundeedxocrine by exocrainceini acwiniith withductsducts (arrowheads)
(ararnodwheadsa)djacent and adjbalcoeondt bvleososdels vessels(V)(V)
Unlike salivary glands, the pancreas lacks myoepithelial cells in acini and lacks
striated ducts. Also, unlike salivary glands, the cells of the intercalated ducts
extend partially into the lumen of pancreatic acini as centroacinar cells. The
pancreas does not usually have mucinous cells in acini, but may have mucinous
cells in its ducts.
Pancreatic acini drain via progressively larger ducts into the duodenum. The main
pancreatic duct (of Wirsung) is the distal portion of the dorsal pancreatic duct
that joined the ventral pancreatic duct in the head of the pancreas. The main duct
typically joins with the common bile duct and enters the duodenum through the
ampulla of Vater (controlled by the sphincter of Oddi). Sometimes the pancreas
has a persistent accessory duct with separate drainage into the duodenum, the
accessory duct of Santorini, and a persisting remnant of the proximal part of the
dorsal pancreatic duct.
Liver
The liver is the largest visceral organ and gland (both exocrine and endocrine) in
the body. Hepatocytes, of endodermal epithelial origin, carry out both exocrine
and endocrine functions. The liver has unusual capillaries, the hepatic sinusoids,
that facilitate exchange (uptake and secretion) between hepatocytes and blood.
The liver has Kupffer cells, specialized cells of the mononuclear phagocyte system
(blood monocyte derived) which patrol the space of Disse between hepatocytes
and blood.
The liver has epithelial lined exocrine (excretory) ducts, the bile ducts, lined by
biliary epithelium, which drain hepatocyte products (bile) into the duodenum,
ultimately through the common bile duct. Blood flow into the liver is dual (75%
from portal vein, 25% from hepatic artery), while blood flow out is via hepatic
veins into the inferior vena cava.
12
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Hepatocyte
Central vein
Bile canaliculi
Sinusoid ethmoidal cell
Sinusoid
Bile flow
Space of
Disse
Kupffer cell
Inlet venule
Sinusoid
Bile duct
Hepatocyte
Portal vein
Bile
canaliculi
Hepatic artery
Figure II 3 25. Organization of a Liver Lobule
Figure II 3 26. Organization of a Liver Lobule
Hepatocytes are functionally polarized, like many other epithelial cells, but rather
than being polarized along a single axis, each hepatocyte has multiple “basal” and
“apical” surfaces.
• Where 2 hepatocytes abut, their “apical” surfaces form bile canaliculi,
extracellular grooved bile channels joined by tight and occluding junctions
between adjacent hepatocytes. Bile is secreted into bile canaliculi, which
drains into progressively larger bile ducts and empties into the duodenum.
• Where a hepatocyte abuts a sinusoid, its membrane has microvilli,
representing a “basal” or basolateral surface. Exchange between blood and
hepatocytes is facilitated by the surface microvilli. This exchange occurs
in the space of Disse, which is between the fenestrated endothelial cells of
the sinusoid and the basal surface of hepatocytes.
The hepatic artery and portal vein enter and the common hepatic duct exits the
liver in the hepatic hilum. Within the liver, branches of the hepatic artery, portal
vein, and bile duct tend to run together in thin connective tissue bands. When seen
in cross section, these 3 structures and their connective tissue are called a portal
triad or portal tract. Blood from both the portal vein and hepatic artery branches
flows through and mixes in hepatic sinusoids that run between cords or plates of
hepatocytes. After passing by hepatocytes, the sinusoidal blood flows into hepatic
venules, which form progressively larger branches draining into the right and left
hepatic veins which drain into the inferior vena cava.
A classic hepatic lobule is a hexagonal structure with a portal tract at each corner
of the hexagon and a central vein in the center of the hexagon. Blood flow is from
the triads into the central vein and bile flow is opposite, from the central vein to
the triads.
12
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Microbiology
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used withCoppyerrimghitssion. McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permission.
Figure II 3 F2i6g.ure LiveIrI 3 27l.obulLeisver lobuwleisth wcitehntralcentral vevineisns (A()A)in itnhe thceenter centeorf of each
lobule and conneecaticvhe lobule taisnsdue connect(iavrerowheadst)issue (arrowhesaedpsa)rating separating each lobule and
eapchortallobuletriadasnd poarttal eacthriads poatinteach ofpointhte oflobthuele lobule(B)(B)
A portal lobule is a triangular structure with a central vein at each corner and a
portal tract in the center. Bile flows from the periphery of the portal lobule into the
central triad.
A hepatic acinus is based on blood flow from the hepatic artery branches to
central veins. As hepatic arterial blood flow enters the sinusoids from side branch
es extending away from the center of the hepatic triad (rather than directly from
the triad), the center of the acinus is conceived of as centered on such a branch
extending out from a triad (or between 2 triads) and ending at 2 nearby central
veins, resulting in a roughly elliptical structure with portal tracts at the 2 furthest
poles and 2 central veins at the 2 closest edges.
In the acinus, the hepatocytes receiving the first blood flow (and the most oxygen
and nutrients) are designated zone 1, while those receiving the last blood flow
(and least oxygen and nutrients) are near the central veins and designated zone 3.
Zone 2 hepatocytes are in between zones 1 and 3. This model helps to explain the
differential effect on hepatocytes of changes in blood flow, oxygenation, etc.
Zone 3 is most susceptible to injury by decreased oxygenation of blood or de
creased blood flow into the liver (as well as stagnation of blood drainage out of the
liver due to congestive heart failure).
The metabolic activity of hepatocytes varies within the zones of the acinus. Zone 1
hepatocytes are most involved in glycogen synthesis and plasma protein synthesis
(albumin, coagulation factors and complement components). Zone 3 cells are
most concerned with lipid, drug, and alcohol metabolism and detoxification.
12
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Ito cells (stellate cells) are mesenchymal cells that live in the space of Disse. They CLINICAL CORRELATE
contain fat and are involved in storage of fat soluble vitamins, mainly vitamin A.
When stimulated during liver injury, Ito cells
Bile formation by hepatocytes serves both an exocrine and excretory function. may release type Icollagen and other matrix
Bile salts secreted into the duodenum aid in fat emulsification and absorption, as components into the space of Disse,
well as excretion of endogenous metabolites (bilirubin) and drug metabolites that contributing to scarring of the liver in some
cannot be excreted by the kidney.
diseases (cirrhosis due to ethanol). This may
lead to the development of portal
Gallbladder hypertension, portacaval anastomoses, and
esophageal or rectal bleeding.
The gallbladder is lined by a simple columnar epithelium with both absorptive and
mucin secretory function, with underlying lamina propria. Unlike the gut tube, the
gallbladder lacks muscularis mucosae and submucosa, and the muscularis
externa is not organized into 2 distinct layers like the gut. The surface of the
gallbladder is covered by peritoneal serosa (mesothelium). The gallbladder has a
CLINICAL CORRELATE
wide end, the fundus, and a narrowing neck, which empties into the cystic duct
Disturbance of the balance in the
and which has spiral valves of Heister. The cystic duct joins the common hepatic
duct to form the common bile duct, which joins the pancreatic duct at or just components of bile can lead to precipitation
before the ampulla of Vater. of one or more of the bile components,
resulting in stone (or calculus) formation or
lithiasis in the gallbladder and/or bile
ducts.
NOTE
Main Functions of Bile
• Absorption of fats from intestinal
lumen
• Excretion
• Transport of IgA
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permission.CoMpycrGigrhatw Hill Companies. Used with permission.
Figure II 3Fi2g8u.re GallbladdIeIr 3 27w.ith Gfaolllbdlsaddelrined by a wsiimthple folcdoslumnarlined epithebliyum a siwmipthle no goblet cells
columnar epithelium with no goblet cells
The gallbladder stores and concentrates bile by absorption of electrolytes and
water. After a meal, entrance of lipid into the duodenum stimulates enteroendo
crine cells of the duodenum to secrete cholecystokinin, which stimulates contrac
tion and emptying of the gallbladder. At the same time, it relaxes the sphincter of
Oddi in the ampulla of Vater. This delivers a bolus of bile into the duodenum.
12
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
ARTERIAL SUPPLY TO ABDOMINAL VISCERA
The blood supply to the abdominal viscera and the body wall is provided by
branches of the abdominal aorta. The aorta enters the abdomen by passing
through the aortic hiatus of the diaphragm at the T12 vertebra (Figure II 3 28). It
Pharmacology Biochemistry
descends on the lumbar vertebra just to the left of the midline and bifurcates at the
L4 vertebral level. During its short course in the abdomen, the aorta gives origin
to 3 groups of branches: (a) 3 unpaired visceral branches, (b) 3 paired visceral
branches, and (c) several parietal branches to the body wall.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
NOTE
T12
Abdominal Aorta Branches
Visceral branches
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Inferior phrenic
Unpaired: celiac (foregut), superior
L1 Celiac
Middle suprarenal
mesenteric (midgut), inferior mesenteric
(hindgut) Superior mesenteric
Microbiology
Paired: middle suprarenals, renals, gonadals
L2 Renal
Parietal branches
Unpaired: median sacral
Paired: inferior phrenics, lumbars, common
iliac Gonadal
Lumbars
L3
Inferior
mesenteric L4
Median sacral Common iliac
Internal iliac (to pelvis
and perineum)
External iliac
(to lower limb)
Figure II 3 29. Visceral and Parietal Branches of the Abdominal Aorta
Figure II 3 28. Visceral and Parietal Branches of the Abdominal Aorta
Three Unpaired Visceral Arteries
CLINICAL CORRELATE
The most common site for an abdominal
Celiac Artery (Trunk)
aneurysm is in the area between the renal
The celiac artery is the blood supply to the structures derived from the foregut.
arteries and the bifurcation of the
The artery arises from the anterior surface of the aorta just inferior to the aortic
abdominal aorta. Signs include decreased
hiatus at the level of T12–L1 vertebra. The celiac artery passes above the superior
circulation to the lower limbs and pain
border of the pancreas and then divides into 3 retroperitoneal branches.
radiating down the back of the lower limbs.
The most common site of atherosclerotic The left gastric artery courses superiorly and upward to the left to reach the lesser
curvature of the stomach. The artery enters the lesser omentum and follows th
plaque is at the bifurcation of the abdominal
aorta.
126
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
lesser curvature distally to the pylorus. The distribution of the left gastric includes
the following:
• Esophageal branch to the distal one inch of the esophagus in the
abdomen
• Most of the lesser curvature
The splenic artery is the longest branch of the celiac trunk and runs a very
tortuous course along the superior border of the pancreas. The artery is retroperi
toneal until it reaches the tail of the pancreas, where it enters the splenorenal
ligament to enter the hilum of the spleen. The distributions of the splenic artery
include:
• Direct branches to the spleen
• Direct branches to the neck, body, and tail of pancreas
• Left gastroepiploic artery that supplies the left side of the greater
curvature of the stomach
• Short gastric branches that supply to the fundus of the stomach
CLINICAL CORRELATE
The common hepatic artery passes to the right to reach the superior surface of the
• The splenic artery may be subject to
first part of the duodenum, where it divides into its 2 terminal branches:
erosion by a penetrating ulcer of the
• Proper hepatic artery ascends within the hepatoduodenal ligament of the posterior wall of the stomach into the
lesser omentum to reach the porta hepatis, where it divides into the right lesser sac.
and left hepatic arteries. The right and left arteries enter the 2 lobes of
the liver, with the right hepatic artery first giving rise to the cystic artery • The left gastric artery may be subject
to the gallbladder. to erosion by a penetrating ulcer of
the lesser curvature of the stomach.
• Gastroduodenal artery descends posterior to the first part of the duode
num and divides into the right gastroepiploic artery (supplies the pyloric
• The gastroduodenal artery may be
end of the greater curvature of the stomach) and the superior pancreati
subject to erosion by a penetrating
coduodenal arteries (supplies the head of the pancreas, where it anasto
ulcer of the posterior wall of the first
moses the inferior pancreaticoduodenal branches of the superior
mesenteric artery). part of the duodenum.
12
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Proper Gastroduodenal artery
hepatic artery Common hepatic artery
Pharmacology Biochemistry Esophageal branch
Cystic artery
Left gastric
artery
Superior
Celiac trunk
Physiology MedicalGenetics
pancreatico
duodenal artery Splenic artery
Right
Left
Pathology gastroepiploic BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
gastroepiploic
artery
artery
Gastroepiploic
Inferior
Microbiology artery
pancreaticoduodenal
artery
Superior mesenteric
artery
Figure II 3 29. Celiac Artery
Figure II 3 30. Celiac Artery
Superior Mesenteric Artery
The superior mesenteric artery (SMA) supplies the viscera of the midgut. The
SMA arises from the aorta deep to the neck of the pancreas just below the origin of
the celiac artery at the L1 vertebral level. It then descends anterior to the uncinate
process of the pancreas and the third part of the duodenum to enter the mesentery
proper. The superior mesenteric vein is to the right of the artery. Branches of the
SMA include:
• Inferior pancreaticoduodenal arteries which anastomose with the
superior pancreaticoduodenal branches of the gastroduodenal artery in
the head of the pancreas
• Intestinal arteries arise as 12–15 branches from the left side of the SMA
and segmentally supply the jejunum and ileum. Distally, they form
vascular arcades and vasa recta arteries at the wall of the gut.
• Ileocolic artery is the most inferior branch which descends to the lower
right quadrant to supply the distal ileum and cecum.
• Right colic artery passes to the right to supply the ascending colon.
• Middle colic artery ascends and enters the transverse mesocolon to supply
the proximal two thirds of the transverse colon.
12
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Transverse colon
Marginal
artery
Middle colic
artery
Inferior
Superior
pancreatico
mesenteric
duodenal artery
artery
Right colic First jejunal
artery artery
Ileocolic
Intestinal
artery
arteries
(jejunal and ileal)
Ascending
colon
Figure II 3 30. Distribution of Superior Mesenteric Artery
Figure II 3 31. Distribution of Superior Mesenteric Artery
Inferior Mesenteric Artery
The inferior mesenteric artery (IMA) is the third unpaired visceral branch of the
aorta that supplies the hindgut (distal third of the transverse colon to the pectinate
line). It arises from the aorta just above its bifurcation at the level of the L3
vertebra. It descends retroperitoneally and inferiorly to the left and gives rise to 3
branches:
• Left colic artery supplies the distal third of the transverse colon and the
descending colon
• Sigmoid arteries to the sigmoid colon
• Superior rectal artery descends into the pelvis and supplies the superior
aspect of the rectum and anal canal.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
The branches of the SMA and IMA to the ascending, transverse and descending
parts of the large intestines are interconnected by a continual arterial arch called Branches of the celiac and superior
the marginal artery. The marginal artery provides a collateral circulation between mesenteric arteries form a collateral
the parts of the large intestines if there is a vascular obstruction in some part of the circulation within the head of the pancreas.
SMA and IMA.
12
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
CLINICAL CORRELATE
The splenic flexure is the most common site
of bowel ischemia.
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Inferior mesenteric
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
artery
Descending colon
Left colic artery
Microbiology
Marginal artery
Sigmoid arteries
Sigmoid colon
Superior rectal
artery
Rectum
Figure II 3 31. Distribution of Inferior Mesenteric Artery
Figure II 3 32. Distribution of Inferior Mesenteric Artery
Three Paired Visceral Arteries
CLINICAL CORRELATE • Middle suprarenal arteries branch from the aorta above the renal arteries
The left renal vein may be compressed by and supply the medial parts of the suprarenal gland.
an aneurysm of the superior mesenteric • Renal arteries are large paired vessels that arise from the aorta at the
artery as the vein crosses anterior to the upper border of the L2 vertebra. They course horizontally to the hila of the
kidneys. The right renal artery is the longer than the left and passes
aorta. Patients with compression of the left
posterior to the inferior vena cava.
renal vein may have renal and adrenal
• Gonadal arteries arise from the anterior surface of the aorta just inferior
hypertension on the left, and, in males, a
to the renal arteries. They descend retroperitoneally on the ventral surface
varicocele on the left.
of the psoas major muscle.
VENOUS DRAINAGE OF ABDOMINAL VISCERA
Inferior Vena Cava
The inferior vena cava forms to the right of the lumbar vertebrae and the
abdominal aorta by the union of the 2 common iliac veins at the L5 vertebral
level. The inferior vena cava ascends to the right of the midline and passes
through the caval hiatus of the diaphragm at the T8 vertebral level. The
inferior vena cava receives blood from the lower limbs, pelvis and perineum,
13
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
paired abdominal viscera, and body wall. Note that the vena cava does not receive
blood directly from the GI tract, except the lower rectum and anal canal.
The right tributaries (right gonadal, right suprarenal) drain separately into the
inferior vena cava. But on the left side, the left gonadal and left suprarenal veins
drain into the left renal vein, which then drains into the vena cava. The left renal
vein crosses anterior to the aorta, just inferior to the origin of the superior
mesenteric artery.
Hepatic veins
Inferior
phrenic vein
T8
Aorta
Left
suprarenal vein
Right
Left
suprarenal vein
renal vein
Right Left
renal vein gonadal vein
Right
Superior
gonadal vein
mesenteric
artery
L5
Common iliac vein
Median sacral vein
Figure FiIgIure3 3I2I. 3 I3n3f.eriorInferior VeVneana CaCvaava and aTnrdibutarieTsributaries
Hepatic Portal System
The hepatic portal system is an extensive network of veins that receives the blood
flow from the GI tract above the pectinate line. The venous flow is carried to the
liver via the hepatic portal vein where it enters the liver sinusoids, which drain to
the hepatic veins, which then drain into the inferior vena cava and ultimately into
the right atrium.
The hepatic portal vein is formed by the union of the superior mesenteric
(drains midgut) and splenic (drains foregut) veins posterior to the neck of the
pancreas. The inferior mesenteric vein (drains hindgut) usually drains into
splenic vein.
13
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Hepatic portal vein
Left gastric vein
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Splenic vein
(foregut)
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Superior mesenteric
vein (midgut)
Inferior mesenteric
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
vein (hindgut)
Microbiology
Figure II 3 33A. FigHuerpeatic II 3 34PAor.tal HepaticSystemPortal System
Sinusoids
Hepatic portal system
Liver
Hepatic veins
Heart
Inferior vena cava
Figure II 3 33B. Comparison of Normal Caval and Portal Blood Flow
Figure II 3 34B. Comparison of Normal Caval and Portal Blood Flow
If there is an obstruction to flow through the portal system (portal hypertension),
blood can flow in a retrograde direction (because of the absence of valves in the
portal system) and pass through anastomoses to reach the caval system. Sites for
these anastomoses include the esophageal veins, rectal veins, and thoracoepigas
tric veins. Enlargement of these veins may result in esophageal varices, hemor
rhoids, or a caput medusae.
13
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Azygos vein (caval)
Esophageal vein (caval)
A Esophageal varices
Esophageal
vein (portal)
Left gastric
Hepatic vein
portal vein
Splenic
Paraumbilical
vein
vein (portal)
Superior
mesenteric vein
Inferior
mesenteric
C Caput
Medusae vein
Superior
Superficial
rectal vein
abdominal
(portal)
veins (caval)
Inferior
rectal vein
(caval)
Internal
B
hemorrhoids
Figure IIFig3ure34. II C3hi3e5f. ChiPeofrtacPavoartlacaval AAnnaasstotommoosseess
Table II 3 6. Sites of Portacaval Anastomoses
Sites of
Portal Caval Clinical Signs
Anastomoses
Esophagus Esophageal veins (left Veins of the thoracic Esophageal
A gastric veins) esophagus, which varices
drain into the azygos
system
Rectum Superior rectal veins Inferior rectal veins Internal
B (inferior mesenteric (internal iliac vein) hemorrhoids
vein)
Umbilicus Paraumbilical veins Superficial veins of Caput medusa
C the anterior abdominal
wall
13
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
URINARY SYSTEM
Embryology of kidneys and Ureter
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Renal development is characterized by 3 successive, slightly overlapping kidney
systems: pronephros, mesonephros, and metanephros.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Stomach
Midgut
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Cecum
Pronephros
Allantois
Mesonephros
Microbiology Cloaca
Mesonephric duct
Meta
nephrogenic
mass Hindgu
Mesonephric duct
Figure II 3 35. Pronephros, Mesonephros, and Metanephros
Figure II 3 36. Pronephros, Mesonephros, and Metanephros
During week 4, segmented nephrotomes appear in the cervical intermediate
mesoderm of the embryo. These structures grow laterally and canalize to form
nephric tubules. The first tubules formed regress before the last ones are formed.
By the end of week 4, the pronephros disappears and does not function.
In week 5, the mesonephros appears as S shaped tubules in the intermediate meso
derm of the thoracic and lumbar regions of the embryo.
• The medial end of each tubule enlarges to form a Bowman’s capsule into
which a tuft of capillaries, or glomerulus, invaginates.
• The lateral end of each tubule opens into the mesonephric (Wolffian)
duct, an intermediate mesoderm derivative. The duct drains into the
hindgut.
• Mesonephric tubules function temporarily and degenerate by the begin
ning of month 3. The mesonephric duct persists in the male as the ductus
epididymis, ductus deferens, and the ejaculatory duct. It disappears in the
female.
During week 5, the metanephros, or permanent kidney, develops from
2 sources: the ureteric bud, a diverticulum of the mesonephric duct, and the
metanephric mass (blastema), from intermediate mesoderm of the lumbar and
sacral regions.
The ureteric bud penetrates the metanephric mass, which condenses around the
diverticulum to form the metanephrogenic cap. The bud dilates to form the renal
pelvis, which subsequently splits into the cranial and caudal major calyces. Each
major calyx buds into the metanephric tissue to form the minor calyces. One to
134
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
3 million collecting tubules develop from the minor calyces, thus forming the
renal pyramids. The ureteric bud forms the drainage components of the urinary
system (calyces, pelvis, ureter).
Penetration of collecting tubules into the metanephric mass induces cells of the
tissue cap to form nephrons, or excretory units. Lengthening of the excretory
tubule gives rise to the proximal convoluted tubule, the loop of Henle, and the
distal convoluted tubule.
The kidneys develop in the pelvis but appear to ascend into the abdomen as a
result of fetal growth of the lumbar and sacral regions. With their ascent, the
ureters elongate, and the kidneys become vascularized by arteries which arise from
the abdominal aorta.
Mesonephric duct
Hindgut
Allantois
Paramesonephric duct
Mesonephric tissue
Allantois Kidney
Bladder
Mesonephros
Urorectal septum
Mesonephric
Cloaca duct
Ureteric bud Ureter
Rectum
Metanephric
blastema Urogenital Anal Urorectal septum
(mass) membrane membrane
End of Week 5 End of Week 8
Figure II 3 36. Development of the Urinary System
Figure II 3 37. Development of the Urinary System
Embryology of Bladder and Urethra
The hindgut does not rotate but it is divided into 2 parts by the urorectal septum.
The urorectal septum divides the cloaca into the anorectal canal and the urogeni
tal sinus by week 7.
13
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
The urogenital sinus is divided into 3 parts:
• The upper (cranial) and largest part of the urogenital sinus (endoderm)
becomes the urinary bladder, which is initially continuous with the
Pharmacology Biochemistry allantois.
– The lumen of the allantois becomes obliterated to form a fibrous cord,
the urachus. The urachus connects the apex of the bladder to the
umbilicus. In the adult, this structure becomes the median umbilical
ligament.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
– The trigone of the bladder is formed by the incorporation of the caudal
mesonephric ducts into the dorsal bladder wall. This mesodermal tissue
is eventually covered by endodermal epithelium so that the entire lining
of the bladder is of endodermal origin. The smooth muscle of the
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
bladder is derived from splanchnic mesoderm.
– The mesonephric ducts also form the ejaculatory ducts as they enter the
prostatic urethra.
Microbiology • The middle part of the urogenital sinus (endoderm) will form all of the
urethra of the female and the prostatic, membranous, and proximal
spongy urethra in the male.
– The prostate gland in the male is formed by an endodermal outgrowth of
the prostatic urethra.
• The inferior part of the sinus forms the lower vagina and contributes to
the primordia of the penis or the clitoris.
The anorectal canal forms the hindgut distally to the pectinate line.
Urogenital sinus
Allantois
Mesonephros
Mesonephric duct
Ureteric bud
Urorectal septum
Anorectal canal
Cloacal membrane
Figure II 3 37. Development of Bladder and Urethra
Figure II 3 38. Development of Bladder and Urethra
Congenital Abnormalities of the Renal System
Renal agenesis results from failure of one or both kidneys to develop because of
early degeneration of the ureteric bud. Unilateral agenesis is fairly common;
bilateral agenesis is fatal (associated with oligohydramnios, and the fetus may have
Potter sequence: clubbed feet, pulmonary hypoplasia, and craniofacial anomalies).
13
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Pelvic kidney is caused by a failure of one kidney to ascend. Horseshoe kidney
(usually normal renal function, predisposition to calculi) is a fusion of both
kidneys at their ends and failure of the fused kidney to ascend. The horseshoe
kidney hooks under the origin of the inferior mesenteric artery.
Double ureter is caused by the early splitting of the ureteric bud or the
development of 2 separate buds.
Failure of the allantois to be obliterated results in urachal fistulas or sinuses. In
male children with congenital valvular obstruction of the prostatic urethra or in
older men with enlarged prostates, a patent urachus may cause drainage of urine
through the umbilicus.
Postnatal Anatomy
CLINICAL CORRELATE
The kidneys are a pair of bean shaped organs approximately 12 cm long. They
The most common sites of ureteral
extend from vertebral level T12 to L3 when the body is in the erect position. The
right kidney is positioned slightly lower than the left because of the mass of the constriction susceptible to blockage by
liver. Both kidneys are in contact with the diaphragm, psoas major, and quadratus renal calculi are:
lumborum.
• Where the renal pelvis joins the ureter
• Right kidney: contacts the above structures and the 12th rib
• Where the ureter crosses the pelvic
• Left kidney: contacts the above structures and the 11th and 12th ribs
inlet
Ureters are fibromuscular tubes that connect the kidneys to the urinary bladder in • Where the ureter enters the wall of the
the pelvis. They run posterior to the ductus deferens in males and posterior to the
urinary bladder
uterine artery in females. They begin as continuations of the renal pelves and run
retroperitoneally, crossing the external iliac arteries as they pass over the pelvic
brim. The ureter lies on the anterior surface of the psoas major muscle.
Aorta
Renal
pelvis
Inferior
vena cava
T12
Parietal pleural
L1
Quadratus reflection
lumborum L2
L3
Psoas major
L4
Iliac
Iliacus L5 crest
Ureter Ischial
spine
Urinary
bladder
Course of pudendal
nerve and internal
pudendal vessels
Figure II 3 38A. Muscles of the Figure II 3 38B. Bony Landmarks of
Figure II 3 39A. Muscles of the Posterior Abdominal Wall Figure II 3 39B. Bony Landmarks of the Posterior Abdominal Wall
Posterior Abdominal Wall the Posterior Abdominal Wall
13
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
NOTE The urinary bladder is covered superiorly by peritoneum. The body is a hollow
muscular cavity.
Parasympathetic fibers facilitate micturition
and sympathetic fibers inhibit micturition. • The neck is continuous with the urethra.
Pharmacology Biochemistry • The trigone is a smooth, triangular area of mucosa located internally at
the base of the bladder.
• The base of the triangle is superior and bounded by the 2 openings of the
ureters. The apex of the trigone points inferiorly and is the opening for the
Physiology MedicalGenetics urethra.
• Blood Supply
– The bladder is supplied by vesicular branches of the internal iliac
arteries and umbilical arteries.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
– The vesicular venous plexus drains to internal iliac veins.
• Lymphatics
– Drain to the external and internal iliac nodes
MicrobiologCyLINICAL CORRELATE
• Innervation
Spastic bladder results from lesions of the
– Parasympathetic innervation is from sacral segments S2, S3, and S4.
spinal cord above the sacral spinal cord
The preganglionic parasympathetic fibers travel in pelvic splanchnic
levels. There is a loss of inhibition of the
nerves to reach the detrusor muscle.
parasympathetic nerve fibers that innervate
– Sympathetic innervation is through fibers derived from L1 through L2
the detrusor muscle during the filling stage.
(lumbar splanchnics). These fibers supply the trigone muscle and the
Thus, the detrusor muscle responds to a
internal urethral sphincter.
minimum amount of stretch, causing urge
• Muscles
incontinence.
– The detrusor muscle forms most of the smooth muscle walls of the
Atonic bladder results from lesions to the
bladder and contracts during emptying of the bladder (micturition).
sacral spinal cord segments or the sacral The contraction of these muscles is under control of the parasympa
spinal nerve roots. Loss of pelvic splanchnic thetic fibers of the pelvic splanchnics (S2, 3, 4)
motor innervation with loss of contraction of – The internal urethral sphincter (sphincter vesicae) is smooth muscle
the detrusor muscle results in a full bladder fibers that enclose the origin of the urethra at the neck of the bladder.
with a continuous dribble of urine from the These muscles are under control of the sympathetic fibers of the lower
thoracic and lumbar splanchnics (T11 L2) and are activated during the
bladder.
filling phase of the bladder to prevent urinary leakage.
– The external urethral sphincter (sphincter urethrae) is the voluntary
CLINICAL CORRELATE skeletal muscle component of the urogenital diaphragm that encloses the
urethra and is relaxed during micturition (voluntary muscle of micturi
Weakness of the puborectalis part of the
tion). The external sphincter is innervated by perineal branches of the
levator ani muscle may result in rectal
pudendal nerve.
incontinence.
The male urethra is a muscular tube approximately 20 cm in length. The urethra
Weakness of the sphincter urethrae part of in men extends from the neck of the bladder through the prostate gland (prostatic
the urogenital diaphragm may result in urethra) to the urogenital diaphragm of the perineum (membranous urethra), and
then to the external opening of the glans (penile or spongy urethra).
urinary incontinence.
13
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
The male urethra is anatomically divided into 3 portions: prostatic, membranous,
and spongy (penile). The distal spongy urethra of the male is derived from the
ectodermal cells of the glans penis.
The female urethra is approximately 4 cm in length and extends from the neck of
the bladder to the external urethral orifice of the vulva.
URINARY HISTOLOGY
The urinary system consists of 2 kidneys, 2 ureters, the bladder, and the urethra.
Cortex
Medulla
Minor calyx
Major calyx
Renal
pyramid
Hilum
Renal pelvis
Renal column
(of Bertin)
Ureter
Figure II 3 39. Organization of the Kidney
Figure II 3 40. Organization of the Kidney
The urinary system functions in the removal of waste products from blood. The
kidney also functions in fluid balance, salt balance, and acid base balance. The
kidney functions as an endocrine gland; it produces and releases renin, which
leads to an increase in extracellular fluid volume; erythropoietin, which stimulates
erythropoiesis; and prostaglandins, which act as vasodilators.
A sagittal section through the center of a kidney shows a capsule (connective
tissue) surrounding and protecting the organ, a wide band of cortex showing
radial striations and the presence of glomeruli, and a medulla in the shape of an
inverted pyramid. The medulla in turn shows an outer and inner zone. The blunted
tip of the pyramid, called the papilla, borders a space that is surrounded by calices
of the ureter. The collecting ducts are invaginations of the papilla’s epithelium and
the urine drains from their open ends into the calices.
13
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Table II 3 7. Basic Functions of the kidneys
Fluid balance Maintain normal extracellular fluid (ECF) and intracel
lular fluid (ICF) volumes
Pharmacology Biochemistry Electrolytes Balance excretion with intake to maintain normal
plasma concentrations
Wastes Excrete metabolic wastes (nitrogenous products,
acids, toxins, etc.)
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Fuels Reabsorb metabolic fuels (glucose, lactate, amino
acids, etc.)
Blood Regulate ECF volume for the long term control of blood
pressure pressure
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Acid−base Regulate absorption and excretion of H+ and HCO3 − to
control acid−base balance
Microbiology
Organization of the kidney
The cortex is divided into lobules, and contains nephron elements mixed with
vascular elements and stroma (a small amount of connective tissue). At the center
of each lobule is a medullary ray, containing tubules that are parallel to each other
and oriented radially in the cortex. The tubules in the medullary rays are continu
ous with those in the medulla. Along the 2 edges of each lobule are glomeruli,
located along 1 or 2 rows. Radially oriented arterioles and venules with a large
lumen are located at the edges of the lobules.
The medulla is comprised of radially arranged straight tubules which run from
cortex to papilla, vascular elements, and stroma (a small amount of connective
tissue). The medulla is divided into 2 zones. A wide strip in proximity to the
cortex, the outer medulla contains profiles of tubules with different appearances.
The inner medulla has fewer profiles of similar tubes.
Blood Circulation
The renal artery enters the kidney at the hilum, near the ureter. The artery branch
es into interlobar arteries, which travel to the medulla–cortex border remaining
outside the medullary pyramids. The vessels branch into arcuate arteries (and
veins) that follow the edge of the cortex. The arcuate arteries branch into inter
lobular arterioles that travel tangentially in the cortex at the edges of the lobules.
Intralobular arterioles, feeding the glomeruli, branch off the interlobular arterioles
at each renal corpuscle.
The kidneys receive 25% of total cardiac output, 1,700 liters in 24 hours. Each
intralobular arteriole enters a renal corpuscle at the vascular pole as afferent
arteriole and forms a convoluted tuft of capillaries (the glomerulus). A second
arteriole (the efferent arteriole) exits the corpuscle. This is a unique situation due to
the fact that the pressure remains high in the glomerulus in order to allow filtration.
The efferent arterioles carrying blood out of the glomeruli make a second capillary
bed. This second capillary bed has lower blood pressure than the glomerulus and it
connects to venules at its distal end. The arteriole capillary arteriole capillary vein
sequence in the kidney is unique in the body. The efferent arterioles from glomeruli
in the upper cortex divide into a complex capillary system in the cortex.
14
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
NEPHRON
The functional unit within the kidney is the nephron. Each kidney contains 1–1.3
million nephrons. Nephrons connect to collecting ducts, and collecting ducts
receive urine from several nephrons and converge with each other before opening
to and letting the urine flow out of the kidney. The nephron and the collecting duct
form the uriniferous tubule.
The nephron is a tube about 55 mm in length in the human kidney. It starts at one
end with Bowman’s capsule, which is the enlarged end of the nephron. Bowman’s
capsule has been invaginated by a tuft of capillaries of the glomerulus so that it has
2 layers: the visceral layer is in direct contact with the capillary endothelium, and
the parietal layer surrounds an approximately spherical urinary space. Bowman’s
capsule and glomerulus of capillaries form a renal corpuscle.
Proximal Bowman's
tubule capsule
Corte
Distal
tubule
Outer Collecting
zone duct
Medulla
Inner
zone
Loop
of Henle
Figure II 3 40. Nephron
Figure II 3 41. Nephron
141
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Renal Corpuscle
The parietal layer of Bowman’s capsule is continuous with the walls of the proximal
convoluted tubule (PCT). The visceral layer cells are called podocytes and have a
complex shape; the cell body has extensive primary and secondary foot processes
Pharmacology Biochemistry
which surround the blood vessels. The foot processes of the podocytes lie a basal
lamina that is shared by capillary endothelial cells. The podocyte foot processes
almost completely cover the capillary surfaces, leaving small slits in between.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Afferent arteriole
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Efferent
arteriole
Microbiology
Visceral layer (podocytes)
Area
of detail
Parietal layer
Urinary space
Fenestrated
capillary
Basal
lamina
Urinary
space
Podocyte
Foot
processes
Figure IIFig3ure41. II R3en4a2l. RenaClorpuCscolrepuscle anadnd BowBmowanm’san’s Capsule Capsule
14
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used withCoppyerrimghistsion. McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permission.
Figure II 3Figur4e2. IIRen3al43. Recnoarlpusclceorpuscle propxriomxaimlal tubtuulbeule (A), (vAas)c,ular vascuplaorle (B), pole (B),
glomerulus glomerulus (C), (C),andand uurriinnaarryy spacespace(D) (D)
Simple cuboidal epithelium of the distal tubule (arrowhead)
Simple cuboidal epithelium of the distal tubule (arrowhead)
From the FIrMomC, ©the201IM0C,DxR© 2D0e1v0elopDmxeRnt DevelGopromuepn,t Inc. GArollupr,ightsIncr.eserAvelld. rights reserved.
Figure II 3 43. FiguSrceanningII 3 44. Secleacntnrionng elecmtroicnrographmicrograph demdoenmstorantsitnrgating podocytes
wpitohdocytestheir witphrocethsseeirs processes (arrow(sa)rrows)
14
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Urinary
(Bowman’s) space
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Podocyte
foot processes
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Podocyte
Capillary
Microbiology
endothelial
RBC
From the IMC, © 2010 DxR Development Group, Inc. All rights reserved.
From the IMC, © 2010 DxR Development Group, Inc.
All rights reserved.
Figure II 3 44. Transmission electron micrograph demonstrating podocytes
Figure II 3 45. Transmission electron micrograph demonstrating podocytes
Blood plasma is filtered from the lumen of the capillary to the urinary space across
the combined capillary endothelium podocyte complex. Fenestrations in the
endothelium are large (50–100 nm) and occupy 20% of the capillary surface.
Fenestrations block the exit of cells, but allow free flow of plasma. The shared basal
lamina of podocytes and endothelium constitutes the first, coarser filtration
barrier; it blocks the passage of molecules larger than 70 kD.
The thin diaphragms covering the slit openings between the podocyte foot
processes constitute a more selective filter. The slits are composed of elongated
proteins which arise from the surface of the adjacent foot process cell membranes
and join in the center of the slit, in a zipper like configuration. The width of the
junction between 2 adjacent podocytes varies between 20 and 50 nm, possibly as a
function of perfusion pressures of the glomerulus.
Podocyte foot processes are motile (they contain actin and myosin). They are
connected to each other by the slit diaphragm and to the basal lamina. The slit
diaphragm molecular complex is associated with the actin cytoskeleton. Altera
tions in composition and/or arrangement of these complexes are found in many
forms of human and experimental diseases.
14
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Proximal Convoluted Tubule
The proximal convoluted tubule (PCT) opens at the urinary pole of Bowman’s
capsule. The PCT follows a circuitous path and ends with a straight segment that
connects to the loop of Henle. PCT cells are tall, and they have a pink cytoplasm,
long apical microvilli, and extensive basal invaginations. Numerous large mito
chondria are located between the basal invaginations. The lateral borders of
adjacent cells are extensively interdigitated. These characteristics are typical of cells
involved in active transport. The lumen of the PCT is frequently clouded by
microvilli which do not preserve well during the histologic preparation process.
Loop of Henle
The loop of Henle has a smaller diameter than the PCT and has descending and
ascending limbs which go in opposite directions. Some loops of Henle have a
wider segment before the distal tubule. The straight and convoluted segments of
the distal convoluted tubule (DCT) follow. The straight portions of the PCT and
DCT have traditionally been assigned to the loop of Henle (constituting the thick
ascending and descending limbs) but they are now thought to be part of the PCT
and DCT to which they are more similar. The special disposition of the loops of
Henle descending and ascending branches, coupled with their specific transport
and permeability properties, allow them to operate as “countercurrent multipliers,”
creating a gradient of extracellular fluid tonicity in the medulla. This is used to
modulate urine tonicity and final volume.
Distal Convoluted Tubule NOTE
The DCT comes back to make contact with its own glomerulus, and then connects Renal cortex and medullary fibroblasts
to the collecting tubule, which receives urine from several nephrons and is open at (interstitial cells) produce erythropoietin.
its far end. The epithelium of DCT, loops of Henle, and collecting ducts have
variable thicknesses and more or less well defined cell borders. Some have limited
surface microvilli. In general, these tubes either do much less active transport than
NOTE
the PCT or are involved only in passive water movements.
Diuretics act by inhibiting Na+ resorption,
leading to an increase in Na+ and water
Collecting Ducts excretion.
Collecting ducts are lined by principal cells and intercalated cells. The cell outline
of these cells is more distinct than that of the PCT or the DCT. Principal cells
respond to aldosterone.
Mesangial Cells
Mesangial cells (also known as Polkissen or Lacis cells) are located between
capillaries, under the basal lamina but outside the capillary lumen. There is no
basal lamina between mesangial and endothelial cells. Mesangial cells are phago
cytic and may be involved in the maintenance of the basal lamina. Abnormalities
of mesangial cells are detected in several diseases resulting in clogged and/or
distorted glomeruli.
14
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Proximal tubule
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Glomerular basement
membrane
Basement membrane
Physiology MedicalGenetics of Bowman’s capsule
Glomerular
epithelium
Epithelium of
Bowman’s capsule
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Polkissen cell
Juxtaglomerular cells
Microbiology
Afferent arteriole
Efferent arteriole
Macula
Distal tubule densa
Figure II 3Figu4r5e. RIIen3al46. RCeonrapluscleCorpuscle anadnd JJuuxxttaagglloommeerruullaarr ApparatusApparatus
Juxtaglomerular Complex
The juxtaglomerular (JG) complex is a complex comprising JG apparatus (in the
wall of the afferent arteriole), the macula densa (a special domain of the DCT),
and a group of mesangial cells. The JG cells are modified smooth muscle cells
which secrete renin.
The macula densa is formed by tall cuboidal cells in the wall of the DCT which
detect sodium levels in the tubular fluid.
14
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
PELVIS
Embryology of the Reproductive System
Table II 3 8. Embryology of Reproductive System
Male and Female Development
Adult Female and Male Reproductive Structures Derived From Precursors of the Indifferent Embryo
Adult Female Indifferent Embryo Adult Male
Ovary, follicles, rete ovarii Gonads Testes, seminiferous tubules, rete testes
TDF +
Uterine tubes, uterus, cervix, Paramesonephric ducts Appendix of testes
and upper part of vagina −
MIF
Duct of Gartner Mesonephric ducts Epididymis, ductus deferens, seminal
vesicle, ejaculatory duct
Testosterone +
Clitoris Genital tubercle Glans and body of
penis
Labia minora Urogenital folds Ventral aspect of
penis
Labia majora Labioscrotal swellings Scrotum
Abbreviations: DHT, dihydrotestosterone; MIF, Müllerian inhibiting factors; TDF, testes determining factor
Congenital Reproductive Anomalies
Female Pseudointersexuality
• 46,XX genotype
• Have ovarian (but no testicular) tissue and masculinization of the female
external genitalia
• Most common cause is congenital adrenal hyperplasia, a condition in
which the fetus produces excess androgens
Male Pseudointersexuality
• 46,XY genotype
• Testicular (but no ovarian) tissue and stunted development of male
external genitalia
• Most common cause is inadequate production of dihydrotestosterone due
to a 5α reductase deficiency
14
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
5α reductase 2 deficiency
• Caused by a mutation in the 5α reductase 2 gene that renders
5α reductase 2 enzyme underactive in catalyzing the conversion of
Pharmacology Biochemistry testosterone to dihydrotestosterone
• Clinical findings: underdevelopment of the penis and emission of sperm
(microphallus, hypospadias, and bifid scrotum) and prostate. The
epididymis, ductus deferens, seminal vesicle, and ejaculatory duct are
normal
Physiology MedicalGenetics
• At puberty, these patients undergo virilization due to an increased
T: DHT ratio.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Complete androgen insensitivity (CAIS, or testicular feminization syndrome)
• Occurs when a fetus with a 46,XY genotype develops testes and female
external genitalia with a rudimentary vagina; the uterus and uterine tubes
are generally absent
Microbiology • Testes may be found in the labia majora and are surgically removed to
circumvent malignant tumor formation.
• Individuals present as normal appearing females, and their psychosocial
orientation is female despite their genotype.
• Most common cause is a mutation in the androgen receptor (AR) gene
that renders the AR inactive.
Abnormalities of the Penis and Testis
• Hypospadias occurs when the urethral folds fail to fuse completely,
resulting in the external urethral orifice opening onto the ventral surface
of the penis. It is generally associated with a poorly developed penis that
curves ventrally (known as chordee).
• Epispadias occurs when the external urethral orifice opens onto the
dorsal surface of the penis. It is generally associated with exstrophy of the
bladder.
• Undescended testes (cryptorchidism) occurs when the testes fail to
descend into the scrotum (typically occurs within 3 months after birth).
The undescended testes may be found in the abdominal cavity or in the
inguinal canal. Bilateral cryptorchidism results in sterility.
• Hydrocele of the testes occurs when a small patency of the processus
vaginalis remains, so that peritoneal fluid can flow into the processus
vaginalis. The result is a fluid filled cyst near the testes.
14
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Pelvic and Urogenital Diaphragms
The pelvic and urogenital diaphragms are 2 important skeletal muscle dia
phragms that provide support of the pelvic and perineal structures. They are each
innervated by branches of the pudendal nerve.
• The pelvic diaphragm forms the muscular floor of the pelvis and sepa
rates the pelvic cavity from the perineum. The pelvic diaphragm is a
strong support for the pelvic organs and transmits the distal parts of the
genitourinary system and GI tract from the pelvis to the perineum.
– The diaphragm is formed by 2 layers of fascia and the 2 muscles: the
levator ani and coccygeus.
– The puborectalis component of the levator ani muscle forms a muscular
sling around the anorectal junction, marks the boundary between the
rectum and anal canal, and is important in fecal continence.
• The muscular urogenital diaphragm is located in the perineum inferior
to the pelvic diaphragm. It is formed by 2 muscles (sphincter urethrae
and deep transverse perineus muscles) which extend horizontally between
the 2 ischiopubic rami.
– The diaphragm is penetrated by the urethra in the male and the
urethra and vagina in the female.
– The sphincter urethrae muscle serves as an external urethral sphincter
(voluntary muscle of micturition) which surrounds the membranous
urethra and maintains urinary continence.
Thorax
Thoracic diaphragm
Abdomen
Iliac crest
Pelvic brim
Pelvis
Urinary bladder Pelvic diaphragm
• Levator ani muscl
Ischial tuberosity
Urogenital diaphragm
Perineum
Urethra • Sphincter urethrae muscle (voluntary muscle
of micturition—external urethral sphincter)
Figure II 3 46. Pelvic Diaphragm
Figure II 3 47. Pelvic Diaphragm
149
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Male Pelvic Viscera
The position of organs and peritoneum in the male pelvis is illustrated below.
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Detrusor muscle (pelvic splanchnics)
Trigone
Ductus Ureter
deferens
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Parietal peritoneum
Fundus of bladder
Urinary bladder
Rectovesical pouch
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Internal urethral sphincter
Rectum
(lumbar splanchnics)
Microbiology Prostatic M Ductus deferens
A
P
Urethra Membranous
Seminal vesicle
Penile (spongy)
Corpora cavernosa Ejaculatory duct
Corpus spongiosum
(with urethra)
Prostate
Bulb of penis
Median lobe (M) {Periurethral zone}
Anterior lobe (A)
Urogenital diaphragm Bulbourethral
Posterior lobe (P) {Peripheral zone}
(sphincter urethrae external gland
urethral sphincter) pudendal nerve
Figure II 3 47. Male Pelvis
Figure II 3 48. Male Pelvis
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Hyperplasia of the Prostate
An enlarged prostate gland will compress the
urethra. The patient will complain of the urge
to urinate often and has difficulty with
starting urination.
Because the prostate gland is enclosed in a
dense connective tissue capsule, hypertrophy
will compress the prostatic portion of the
urethra.
15
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Female Pelvic Viscera
The position of organs and peritoneum in the female pelvis is illustrated below.
Parietal peritoneum
Ureter
Suspensory ligament
of ovary (ovarian vessels) Fundus of uterus
Ovary Uterus (body)
Uterine tube
Cervix
Round ligament
Rectouterine pouch
of uterus
(Pouch of Douglas)
Vesicouterine
pouch
Posterior fornix
Urinary bladder
Rectum
Urogenital
diaphragm Vagina
Clitoris
Urethra
Vestibule
Figure II 3 48. Female Pelvis
Figure II 3 49. Female Pelvis
CLINICAL CORRELATE
The ureter courses just medial to the
suspensory ligament of the ovary and must
be protected when ligating the ovarian
vessels.
15
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
CLINICAL CORRELATE Uterus and Broad Ligament
Support for pelvic viscera is provided by the A posterior view of the female reproductive tract is shown below.
pelvic and urogenital diaphragms, perineal
Pharmacologmyembrane, perineal body, andBiocthheemisttrraynsverse
(cardinal) cervical and uterosacral Broad Mesosalpinx Round
ligaments. Weakness of support structures ligament Mesovarium ligaments
Mesometrium of uterus
may result in prolapse of the uterus into the
Ovarian
Physiologyvagina or herniation of the bMladeddiecralGenetoicrs
artery
rectum into the vagina.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
The ureter passes inferior to the uterine
Suspensory
artery 1–2 centimeters from the cervix
ligament of ovary Ovarian
(“water under the bridge”) and must be ligament
Microbiologayvoided during surgical procedures.
Uterine artery
(”water under bridge”) Transverse (cardinal)
cervical ligament
Ureter
Uterosacral ligamen
Figure II 3 49. Broad Ligament
Figure II 3 50. Broad Ligament
PERINEUM
The perineum is the diamond shaped outlet of the pelvis located below the pelvic
diaphragm. It is divided by a transverse line between the ischial tuberosities into
the anal and urogenital triangles.
• The sensory and motor innervation to the perineum is provided by the
pudendal nerve (S2, 3, 4) of the sacral plexus.
• The blood supply is provided by the internal pudendal artery, a branch of
the internal iliac artery.
• The pudendal nerve and vessels cross the ischial spine posteriorly to enter
the perineum.
Anal Triangle
CLINICAL CORRELATE
The anal triangle is posterior and contains the anal canal surrounded by the
Apudendal nerve block to anesthetize the
fat filled ischioanal fossa. The anal canal is guarded by a smooth muscle internal
perineum is performed as the pudendal
anal sphincter innervated by the ANS and an external anal sphincter of skeletal
nerve crosses posterior to the ischial spine. muscle innervated by the pudendal nerve. The pudendal canal transmitting the
pudendal nerve and internal pudendal vessels is found on the lateral aspect of the
ischioanal fossa.
Urogenital Triangle
The urogenital triangle forms the anterior aspect of the perineum and contains
the superficial and root structures of the external genitalia. The urogenital triangle
is divided into superficial and deep perineal spaces (pouches).
152
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
The superficial perineal pouch is located between the perineal membrane of the
urogenital diaphragm and the superficial perineal (Colles’) fascia.
It contains:
• Crura of penis or clitoris: erectile tissue
• Bulb of penis (in the male): erectile tissue; contains urethra
• Bulbs of vestibule (in the female): erectile tissue in lateral walls of vestibule
• Ischiocavernosus muscle: skeletal muscle that covers crura of penis or
clitoris
• Bulbospongiosus muscle: skeletal muscle that covers bulb of penis or bulb
of vestibule
• Greater vestibular (Bartholin) gland (in female only): homologous to
Cowper gland
The deep perineal pouch is formed by the fasciae and muscles of the urogenital NOTE
diaphragm. It contains:
The bulbourethral (Cowper) glands are
located in the deep perineal pouch of the
• Sphincter urethrae muscle—serves as voluntary external sphincter of the
urethra male.
• Deep transverse perineal muscle The greater vestibular (Bartholin) glands
• Bulbourethral (Cowper) gland (in the male only)—duct enters bulbar are located in the superficial perineal
urethra pouch of the female.
Bladder
Prostate
Levator ani muscle
Obturator internus muscle
Deep perineal space
Sphincter urethrae
(urogenital diaphragm)
Crus of penis
Perineal membrane
Buck fascia
Ischiocavernosus muscle
Superficial perineal space
Bulb of penis
Bulbourethral (Cowper) gland Buck fascia
Urethra Bulbospongiosus muscle
Superficial perineal (Colles’) fascia
Figure II 3 50. Superficial and Deep Perineal Pouches of Male
Figure II 3 51. Superficial and Deep Perineal Pouches of Male
15
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
External Genitalia
Male
Pharmacology Biochemistry Crura of penis are continuous with the corpora cavernosa of the penis.
Bulb of penis is continuous with corpus spongiosis of the penis (contains urethra).
Corpora cavernosa and corpus spongiosis form the shaft of the penis.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
In the male, injury to the bulb of the
Ductus deferens
penis (blue arrow) may result in
extravasation of urine from the Prostate gland
urethra into the superficial perineal Median lobe (M)
Microbiology Anterior lobe (A)
space. From this space, urine may
M Posterior lobe (P)
pass into the scrotum, into the
A
P
penis, and onto the anterior
abdominal wall in the plane deep to
Scarpa fascia (green arrows). Urethra
Urogenital
diaphragm
Penis
Bulbourethral
gland
Figure II 3 51. FMigaulere IRIep3rod5u2c.tiveMale Urethra System
15
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Female
Crura of the clitoris are continuous with the corpora cavernosa of the clitoris.
Bulbs of vestibule are separated from the vestibule by the labia minora.
Urethra and vagina empty into the vestibule.
Duct of greater vestibular glands enters the vestibule.
Pubic symphysis
Pudendal canal Urethra
• Pudendal nerve Ischiopubic ramus
• Internal pudendal
Urogenital triangle
vessels
Vagina
Ischial tuberosity
Sacrotuberous Anal triangle
ligament
Anal canal
Coccyx
Figure FiguIrIe3 53. IPIeri3neum52. oPferinFeeummale of Female
Pelvic and Perineal Innervation
The pudendal nerve (S2, S3, S4 ventral rami) and its branches innervate the
skeletal muscles in the pelvic and urogenital diaphragms, the external anal
sphincter and the sphincter urethrae, skeletal muscles in both perineal pouches,
and the skin that overlies the perineum.
15
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
MALE REPRODUCTIVE HISTOLOGY
Testis
ISBN: Author, Title, Ed
Pharmacology Biochemistry
The testis is surrounded by a dense fibrous capsule called the tunica USaMlbLuEginea. Step 1 Anatomy
The tunica albuginea is continuous with many oFfig.t#he interlobuFlialer name septa that dDivaitdee
1st Pass 09 02 10 3rd
the testis into approximately 250 pyramidal compaIrtm1e0nts1 An(atet_stIicula1r0 1.eps lobules). 2nd Pass 12 07 10 4th
Artist Author’s review
Within each lobule are 1–4 tubes, seminiferous tubules, where spermatozoa are (ifneeded)
Physiology MedicalGenetics
produced. Each tubule is a coiled, non branching closed loop that is 150–200 μm in A
electronic publishing services inc.
diameter and 30–70 cm in length. Both ends of each tubule converge on the rete
845ThirdAve6thFloorNY,NY10022 Initials
testes. The seminiferous tubules contain spermatogenic cells, Sertoli cells, and a
well defined basal lamina.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Microbiology
Ductus deferens
Seminal vesicle
Ejaculatory
Corpus
duct
cavernosum
Prostate
Cowper gland Corpus
spongiosum
Penis
Epididymis
Urethra
Testicle
Figure II 3 53. Male reproductive system
Figure II 3 54. Male Reproductive System
15
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Cross section of
seminiferous tubules
NOTE
The blood–testis barrier is formed by tight
junctions between Sertoli cells and protects
primary spermatocytes and their progeny. *Area of detail
Spermatids
Secondary
spermatocyte*
Primary Spermatozoa
spermatocyte
Tight junction
(blood–testis
barrier)
Sertoli cell
Spermatogonium
Basement membrane
Connective tissue
Leydig cell
*least likely to be seen
Figure II 3 55. Seminiferous Tubule Diagram
Figure II 3 54. Seminiferous tubule diagram
Spermatogenesis
The spermatogenic cells (germinal epithelium) are stacked in 4 to 8 layers that
occupy the space between the basement membrane and the lumen of the seminif
erous tubule. The stem cells (spermatogonia) are adjacent to the basement
membrane. As the cells develop, they move from the basal to the luminal side of
the tubule.
15
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
At puberty the stem cells resume mitosis, producing more stem cells as well as
differentiated spermatogonia (type A and B) that are committed to meiosis. Type
B spermatogonia differentiate into primary spermatocytes that enter meiosis.
Primary spermatocytes (4n, diploid) pass through a long prophase (10 days to 2
Pharmacology Biochemistry weeks) and after the first meiotic division form 2 secondary spermatocytes (2n,
haploid). The secondary spermatocytes rapidly undergo the second meiotic
division in a matter of minutes (and are rarely seen in histologic sections) to
produce the spermatids (1n, haploid).
Physiology MedicalGenetics
The progeny of a single maturing spermatogonium remain connected to one
another by cytoplasmic bridges throughout their differentiation into mature
sperm.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Microbiology
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permission.
Figure II 3 56. Seminiferous tubule surrounded by a basement membrane (A) and myoepithelial cells
Spermatogonia (B) lie on the basement membrane,
primary spermatocytes (C), and spermatozoa (D) are
inside the blood testis barrier.
Sertoli cells (arrow) have elongated, pale staining nuclei.
15
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Spermiogenesis
Spermiogenesis transforms haploid spermatids into spermatozoa. This process of
differentiation involves formation of the acrosome, condensation, and elongation of
the nucleus; development of the flagellum; and loss of much of the cytoplasm.
Acrosome
Head
Nucleus
Mitochondria
Mid
piece
Microtubules
Flagellum
Tail
Principal
piece
End
piece
Figure FigIuIre3 5I6I.3 5S7.permSapteorzmoaantozoan
The acrosome, which is located over the anterior half of the nucleus, is derived
from the Golgi complex of the spermatid and contains several hydrolytic enzymes
such as hyaluronidase, neuraminidase, and acid phosphatase; these enzymes
dissociate cells of the corona radiata and digest the zona pellucida of the recently
produced secondary oocyte.
The basic structure of a flagellum is similar to that of a cilium. Movement is a
result of the interaction among microtubules, ATP, and dynein.
15
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Sertoli Cells and the Blood–Testis Barrier
Sertoli cells are tall columnar epithelial cells. These multifunctional cells are the
predominant cells in the seminiferous tubule prior to puberty and in elderly men
but comprise only 10% of the cells during times of maximal spermatogenesis.
Pharmacology Biochemistry
• Irregular in shape; the base adheres to the basal lamina and the apical end
extends to the lumen. The nucleus tends to be oval with the long axis
oriented perpendicular to the basement membrane.
Physiology MedicalGenetics • The cytoplasmic extensions make contact with neighboring Sertoli cells
via tight junctions, forming the blood–testis barrier by separating the
seminiferous tubule into a basal and an adluminal compartment.
• Do not divide during the reproductive period.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
• Support, protect, and provide nutrition to the developing spermatozoa.
During spermiogenesis, the excess spermatid cytoplasm is shed as residual
bodies that are phagocytized by Sertoli cells. They also phagocytize germ
cells that fail to mature.
Microbiology • Secrete androgen binding protein that binds testosterone and dihydrotes
tosterone. High concentrations of these hormones are essential for normal
germ cell maturation. The production of androgen binding protein is
stimulated by follicle stimulating hormone (FSH receptors are on Sertoli
cells).
• Secrete inhibin, which suppresses FSH synthesis.
• Produce anti Müllerian hormone during fetal life that suppresses the
development of female internal reproductive structures.
The blood–testis barrier is a network of Sertoli cells which divides the seminifer
ous tubule into a basal compartment (containing the spermatogonia and the
earliest primary spermatocytes) and an adluminal compartment (containing the
remaining spermatocytes and spermatids). The basal compartment has free access
to material found in blood, while the more advanced stages of spermatogenesis are
protected from blood borne products by the barrier formed by the tight junctions
between the Sertoli cells. The primary spermatocytes traverse this barrier by a
mechanism not yet understood.
Interstitial Tissues of the Testis
The interstitial tissue lying between the seminiferous tubules is a loose network of
connective tissue composed of fibroblasts, collagen, blood and lymphatic vessels,
and Leydig cells (also called interstitial cells). The Leydig cells synthesize testoster
one.
16
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used withCoppyerrimghistsion. McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permission.
Figure Figure II I3I 3575.8. IInntteerrssttiittiiuumm betwebeentweenseminiferousseminiferotuusbules containtsubules
contains LeydLiegydig cceellllss (arro(awrr)ow) and fiabnrdoblastsfibrobla(satsrrowhead) (arrowhead)
Genital Ducts
The seminiferous tubules empty into the rete testis and then into 10–20 ductuli
efferentes. The ductuli are lined by a single layer of epithelial cells, some of which
are ciliated. The ciliary action propels the nonmotile spermatozoa. The non
ciliated cells reabsorb some of the fluid produced by the testis. A thin band of
smooth muscle surrounds each ductus.
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used wiCthopyrpigehrmtission.McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permission.
FigFuirgeure IIII3359.58.EfferEenffterentductules ductwulieths ciliatedwithcuboidcialliated and ccuoblouimdanlar cellasnd
columnar cells
16
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
The spermatozoa pass from the ducti efferentes to the epididymis. The major
function of this highly convoluted duct (approximately 5 m long) is the accumula
tion, storage, and maturation of spermatozoa. It is in the epididymis that the
spermatozoa become motile. The epididymis is lined with a pseudostratified
Pharmacology Biochemistry columnar epithelium which contains stereocilia (tall microvilli) on the luminal
surface. This epithelium resorbs testicular fluid, phagocytizes residual bodies and
poorly formed spermatozoa, and secretes substances thought to play a role in the
maturation of spermatozoa.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Microbiology
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used withCoppyerrimghistsion. McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permission.
Figure IIFig3ure59. II E3pid6i0d.ymiEspididymis lineldined bbyy pspeuseduodsotrsattriaftiiefdied columnar columnar
epitheliumepithelium withwith stsetreeroecoicliialia (arro(war)row)
The ductus (vas) deferens conducts spermatozoa from the epididymis to the
ejaculatory duct and then into the prostatic urethra. The ductus (vas) deferens is a
thick walled, muscular tube consisting of an inner and outer layer of longitudinal
smooth muscle and an intermediate circular layer. Vasectomy or the bilateral
ligation of the vas deferens prevents movement of spermatozoa from the epididy
mis to the urethra.
16
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Copyright McGraw HillCompanies. UCseodpyrigwhitth permMiscsGiornaw. Hill Companies. Used with permission.
Figure II 3 60. Ductus deferens with thick layers of smooth muscle
Figure II 3 61. Ductus deferens with thick layers of smooth muscle
Accessory Glands
The seminal vesicles are a pair of glands situated on the posterior and inferior
surfaces of the bladder. These highly convoluted glands have a folded mucosa lined
with pseudostratified columnar epithelium. The columnar epithelium is rich in
secretory granules that displace the nuclei to the cell base.
The seminal vesicles produce a secretion that constitutes approximately 70% of
human ejaculate and is rich in spermatozoa activating substances such as fructose,
citrate, prostaglandins, and several proteins. Fructose, which is a major nutrient
for sperm, provides the energy for motility. The duct of each seminal vesicle joins a
ductus deferens to form an ejaculatory duct. The ejaculatory duct traverses the
prostate to empty into the prostatic urethra.
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. CUopseydrightwith pMercmGisrsaiwon. Hill Companies. Used with permission.
Figure II 3 61. Seminal vesicle showing mucosal folds lined with
Figure II 3 62. Seminal vesicle showing mucosal folds lined
pseudostratified columnar epithelium (arrow)
with pseudostratified columnar epithelium (arrow)
16
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
The prostate is a collection of 30–50 branched tubuloalveolar glands whose ducts
empty into the urethra. The prostate is surrounded by a fibroelastic capsule that is
rich in smooth muscle. There are 2 types of glands in the prostate, periurethral
submucosal glands and the main prostatic glands in the periphery. Glandular
Pharmacology Biochemistry epithelium is pseudostratified columnar with pale, foamy cytoplasm and numer
ous secretory granules. The products of the secretory granules include acid
phosphatase, citric acid, fibrinolysin, and other proteins.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Microbiology
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. UsedCowpyitrhightpermissiMonc.Graw Hill Companies. Used with permission.
Figure IIFi3gure62. IIP3rost6a3te. Prostatewithwithtubtuulbouallovaelovleaorlar glandsglandslined lined by
pseudosbtryatifpiesdeudostratified colcuomlunmarnar epitehpeiltihuemlium
Table II 3 9. Male Reproductive Physiology
Penile Erection
Erection occurs in response to parasympathetic stimulation (pelvic
splanchnic nerves). Nitric oxide is released, causing relaxation of the
corpus cavernosum and corpus spongiosum, which allows blood to
accumulate in the trabeculae of erectile tissue.
Ejaculation
• Sympathetic nervous system stimulation (lumbar splanchnic nerves)
mediates movement of mature spermatozoa from the epididymis and
vas deferens into the ejaculatory duct.
• Accessory glands such as the bulbourethral (Cowper) glands, pros
tate, and seminal vesicles secrete fluids that aid in sperm survival
and fertility.
• Somatic motor efferents (pudendal nerve) that innervate the bulbos
pongiosus and ischiocavernosus muscles at the base of the penis
stimulate the rapid ejection of semen out the urethra during ejacula
tion. Peristaltic waves in the vas deferens aid in a more complete
ejection of semen through the urethra.
16
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Clinical Correlate
• Injury to the bulb of the penis may result in extravasation of urine from
the urethra into the superficial perineal space. From this space, urine
may pass into the scrotum, into the penis, and onto the anterior
abdominal wall.
• Accumulation of fluid in the scrotum, penis, and anterolateral abdomi
nal wall is indicative of a laceration of either the membranous or
penile urethra (deep to Scarpa fascia). This can be caused by trauma
to the perineal region (saddle injury) or laceration of the urethra during
catheterization.
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE HISTOLOGY
Ovary
The paired ovaries have 2 major functions: to produce the female gametes and to
produce the steroid hormones which prepare the endometrium for conception and
maintain pregnancy should fertilization occur. The ovaries are 3 cm long, 1.5 cm
wide, and 1 cm thick. They consist of a medullary region, which contains a rich
vascular bed with a cellular loose connective tissue, and a cortical region where
the ovarian follicles reside.
Fallopian tube
Ampulla
Isthmus
Uterus
Infundibulum
Fimbria
Perimetrium
Endometrium
Myometrium
Figure II 3 63. Female Reproductive System
Figure II 3 64. Female Reproductive System
16
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Folliculogenesis and Ovulation
14 days
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Developing Secondary
Primary follicles oocyte
Mature (graafian)
Physiology MedicalGenetics follicle
follicle
Primordial
follicle
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Secondary oocyte arrested in
Microbiology
metaphase of meiosis II
Ruptured
Corpus follicle
albicans Early
Mature corpus luteum
corpus luteum
Figure II 3 64. Follicular Development
Figure II 3 65. Follicular Development
Theca externa
Theca interna
Cumulus oophorus
Zona pellucida
Corona radiata
Follicular antrum
Granulosa cells
Figure II 3 65.FiguGreraafianII 3 66. FGolrlaicalfeian Follicle
16
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
An ovarian follicle consists of an oocyte surrounded by one or more layers of
follicular cells, the granulosa cells. In utero, each ovary initially contains 3 million
primordial germ cells. Many undergo atresia as the number of follicles in a normal
young adult woman is estimated to be 400,000. A typical woman will ovulate only
around 450 ova during her reproductive years. All other follicles (with their
oocytes) will fail to mature and will undergo atresia.
Before birth, primordial germ cells differentiate into oogonia that proliferate by
mitotic division until they number in the millions. They all enter prophase of the
first meiotic division in utero and become arrested (they are now designated as
primordial follicles). The primordial follicles consist of a primary oocyte sur
rounded by a single layer of squamous follicular cells, which are joined to one
another by desmosomes.
Around the time of sexual maturity, the primordial follicles undergo further
growth to become primary follicles in which the oocyte is surrounded by 2 or
more layers of cuboidal cells. In each menstrual cycle after puberty, several
primary follicles enter a phase of rapid growth. The oocyte enlarges and the
surrounding follicular cells (now called granulosa cells) proliferate. Gap junctions
form between the granulosa cells. A thick layer of glycoprotein called the zona
pellucida is secreted (probably by both the oocyte and granulosa cells) in the
space between the oocyte and granulosa cells. Cellular processes of the granulosa
cells and microvilli of the oocyte penetrate the zona pellucida and make contact
with one another via gap junctions. Around this time the stroma surrounding the
follicle differentiates into a cellular layer called the theca folliculi. These cells are
separated from the granulosa cells by a thick basement membrane. As develop
ment proceeds, 2 zones are apparent in the theca: the theca interna (richly
vascularized) and the theca externa (mostly connective tissue). Cells of the theca
interna synthesize androgenic steroids that diffuse into the follicle and are con
verted to estradiol by the granulosa cells.
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used withCoppyerirgmhitssion. McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permission.
FigureFigure IIII33 6676.. OvOarvyary
Small primordial follicles are at top and 3 primary follicles (arrows) with cuboidal granulosa cells and a
Small primordial follicles are at top and 3 primary follicles (arrows)
thin zona pellucida are below.
with cuboidal granulosa cells and a thin zona pellucida are below.
16
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
As the follicle grows, follicular fluid containing mainly plasma, glycosaminogly
cans and steroids accumulates between the cells. The cavities containing the fluid
coalesce and form a larger cavity, the antrum. At this point, when the antrum is
present, the follicles are called secondary follicles. The oocyte is at its full size and
Pharmacology Biochemistry it is situated in a thickened area of the granulosa called the cumulus oophorus.
The mature follicle (graafian follicle) completes the first meiotic division (haploid,
2N amount of DNA) just prior to ovulation. The first polar body contains little
cytoplasm and remains within the zona pellucida. The Graafian follicle rapidly
Physiology MedicalGenetics
commences the second meiotic division where it arrests in metaphase awaiting
ovulation and fertilization. The second meiotic division is not completed unless
fertilization occurs. The fluid filled antrum has greatly enlarged in the Graafian
follicle and the cumulus oophorus diminishes leaving the oocyte surrounded by
the corona radiata. After ovulation, the corona radiata remains around the ovum
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
where it persists throughout fertilization and for some time during the passage of
the ovum through the oviduct.
Microbiology
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used wCithopyrpiegrhmtission.McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permission.
Figure FigIIure3 6I7I. 3 6S8e.condSaercyondary foflolilclilcele withwitahn antarnum antrum
FoFlloicllliecle isissurrosuunrdroeudnded by a coronbay aradciaotraona of granruadloiasata cellsof
granulosa cells(arrow)(arrowan)d by aandzona bypellucaida.zona pellucida.
Ovulation occurs approximately mid cycle and is stimulated by a surge of
luteinizing hormone secreted by the anterior pituitary. Ovulation consists of
rupture of the mature follicle and liberation of the secondary oocyte (ovum) that
will be caught by the infundibulum, the dilated distal end of the oviduct. The
ovum remains viable for a maximum of 24 hours. Fertilization most commonly
occurs in the ampulla of the oviduct. If not fertilized, the ovum undergoes
autolysis in the oviduct.
After ovulation, the wall of the follicle collapses and becomes extensively infolded,
forming a temporary endocrine gland called the corpus luteum. During this
process, the blood vessels and stromal cells invade the previously avascular layer of
granulosa cells and the granulosa cells and those of the theca interna hypertrophy
16
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
and form lutein cells (granulosa lutein cells and theca lutein cells). The granulosa
lutein cells now secrete progesterone and estrogen and the theca lutein cells secrete
androstenedione and progesterone. Progesterone prevents the development of new
follicles, thereby preventing ovulation.
In the absence of pregnancy the corpus luteum lasts only 10–14 days. The lutein
cells undergo apoptosis and are phagocytized by invading macrophages. The site of
the corpus luteum is subsequently occupied by a scar of dense connective tissue,
the corpus albicans.
When pregnancy does occur, human chorionic gonadotropin produced by the
placenta will stimulate the corpus luteum for about 6 months and then decline. It
continues to secrete progesterone until the end of pregnancy. The corpus luteum of
pregnancy is large, sometimes reaching 5 cm in diameter.
Oviducts
The oviduct (Fallopian tube) is a muscular tube of ~12 cm in length. One end
extends laterally into the wall of the uterus and the other end opens into the
peritoneal cavity next to the ovary. The oviduct receives the ovum from the ovary,
provides an appropriate environment for its fertilization, and transports it to the
uterus. The infundibulum opens into the peritoneal cavity to receive the ovum.
Finger like projections (fimbriae) extend from the end of the tube and envelop the
ovulation site to direct the ovum to the tube.
Adjacent to the infundibulum is the ampulla, where fertilization usually takes
place. A slender portion of the oviduct called the isthmus is next to the ampulla.
The intramural segment penetrates the wall of the uterus.
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permission.CoMpycrGigrhatw Hill Companies. Used with permission.
Figure IIFigu3re68.II 3Ovi6d9u.ctOviduct withwith sismimplpele colcuomlunmarnar epitheliuempitheliumand and
underlying underlying layerlayer ofofssmmoooothth musmcluescle (arrow) (arrow)
16
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
The wall of the oviduct has 3 layers: a mucosa, a muscularis, and a serosa com
posed of visceral peritoneum. The mucosa has longitudinal folds that are most
numerous in the ampulla. The epithelium lining the mucosa is simple columnar.
Some cells are ciliated and the others are secretory. The cilia beat toward the
Pharmacology Biochemistry uterus, causing movement of the viscous liquid film (derived predominantly from
the secretory cells) that covers the surface of the cells. The secretion has nutrient
and protective functions for the ovum and promotes activation of spermatozoa.
Movement of the liquid together with contraction of the muscle layer transports
the ovum or fertilized egg (zygote) to the uterus.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Ciliary action is not essential, so women with immotile cilia syndrome (Karta
gener’s syndrome) will have a normal tubal transport of the ovum. The muscularis
consists of smooth muscle fibers in an inner circular layer and an outer longitudi
nal layer.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
An ectopic pregnancy occurs when the fertilized ovum implants, most commonly
in the wall of the ampulla of the oviduct. Partial development proceeds for a time
but the tube is too thin and the embryo cannot survive. The vascular placental
Microbiology tissues that have penetrated the thin wall cause brisk bleeding into the lumen of
the tube and peritoneal cavity when the tube bursts.
Uterus
The uterus is a pear shaped organ that consists of a fundus which lies above the
entrance sites of the oviducts; a body (corpus) which lies below the entry point of
the oviducts and the internal os; a narrowing of the uterine cavity; and a lower
cylindrical structure, the cervix, which lies below the internal os. The wall of the
uterus is relatively thick and has 3 layers. Depending upon the part of the uterus,
there is either an outer serosa (connective tissue and mesothelium) or adventitia
(connective tissue). The 2 other layers are the myometrium (smooth muscle) and
the endometrium (the mucosa of the uterus).
The myometrium is composed of bundles of smooth muscle fibers separated by
connective tissue. During pregnancy, the myometrium goes through a period of
growth as a result of hyperplasia and hypertrophy. The endometrium consists of
epithelium and lamina propria containing simple tubular glands that occasionally
branch in their deeper portions. The epithelial cells are a mixture of ciliated and
secretory simple columnar cells.
The endometrial layer can be divided into 2 zones. The functionalis is the part
that is sloughed off at menstruation and replaced during each menstrual cycle, and
the basalis is the portion retained after menstruation that subsequently prolifer
ates and provides a new epithelium and lamina propria. The bases of the uterine
glands, which lie deep in the basalis, are the source of the stem cells that divide
and migrate to form the new epithelial lining.
17
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used wiCthopypriegrhmtission.McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permission.
Figure FigurIeI 3 II69.3 70U.teriUneterine wwaallll wiwthithendoemnedtorimumetrium
Simple tubulaSrimpleglands tutboularthe rightglandosf arrowtoandthe myorimghettrium of atrorowthe left of arrow
and myometrium to the left of arrow
Vagina
The wall of the vagina has no glands and consists of 3 layers: the mucosa, a muscu
lar layer, and an adventitia. The mucous found in the vagina comes from the
glands of the uterine cervix. The epithelium of the mucosa is stratified squamous.
This thick layer of cells contains glycogen granules and may contain some kerato
hyalin. The muscular layer of the vagina is composed of longitudinal bundles of
smooth muscle.
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permission.CMopcyGrriagwht Hill Companies. Used with permission.
Figure II 3 70. Vaginal epithelium with vacuolated stratified squamous
Figure II 3 71. Vaginal epithelium with vacuolated stratified squamous epithelial cells that contain
epithelial cells that contain glycogen, which is removed during
glycogen, which is removed during histological processing
histological processing
17
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Mammary Glands
CLINICAL CORRELATE The mammary glands enlarge significantly during pregnancy as a result of prolifer
ation of alveoli at the ends of the terminal ducts. Alveoli are spherical collections
Breast cancer affects about 9% of women
of epithelial cells that become the active milk secreting structures during lactation.
Pharmacologbyorn in the United States. MostBiochoefmistthrey
The milk accumulates in the lumen of the alveoli and in the lactiferous ducts.
cancers (carcinomas) arise from epithelial
Lymphocytes and plasma cells are located in the connective tissue surrounding the
cells of the lactiferous ducts. alveoli. The plasma cell population increases significantly at the end of pregnancy
and is responsible for the secretion of IgA that confers passive immunity on the
Physiology MedicalGenetics newborn.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Microbiology
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used withCoppyerrimghitssion. McGraw Hill Companies. Used with permission.
Figure FigIIure3 72. BIrIeast3 7t1is.sue Breacsotntaining tissuemodifiedcontainminagmmary glmanoddifiedtissue (mararmowm)ary surroundedgland by dense
tissue (arrow) surrounded regularby codnennescetive retgiusslaure (arrocwohnenaedc)tive tissue (arrowhead)
17
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
RADIOLOGY OF THE ABDOMEN AND PELVIS
Duodenum Pylorus Stomach Jejunum
All
From
righttshe
IncI.MC,
©
reGserrovuepd,.
2010
Development
DxR
DxR
Development
2010
reserved
©Group,
IMC,
Inc.
therights
From
All
Ileum
Figure II 3 72. Abdomen: Upper GI, Small Bowel
Figure II 3 73. Abdomen: Upper GI, Small Bowel
Hepatic Transverse Splenic
Flexure Colon Flexure
Inc.
Group, Descending
Colon
Development
DxR
Sigmoid
2010
Colon
reserved.
©
IMC,
therights
From
All
From the IMC, © 2010 DxR Development Group, Inc.
All rights reserved.
Figure II 3 73. Abdomen: Barium Enema
Figure II 3 74. Abdomen: Barium Enema
173
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Inferior
Liver Vena Cava Aorta Diaphragm Stomach
Pharmacology Biochemistry Inc.
Group,
Development
Physiology MedicalGenetics
DxR
2010
Spleen
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences © reserved
IMC,
therights
From
All
Microbiology
From the IMC, © 2010 DxR Development Group, Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure II 3 74. Abdomen: CT, T11
Figure II 3 75. Abdomen: CT, T11
Liver Portal Vein Descending Colon
All
From
righttshe
Inc.
IMC,
©
reGsreoruvped,.
2010
Development
DxR
DxR
Development
2010
reserved.
© Group,
IMC,
Inc.
therights
From
All
Inferior Vena Cava Diaphragm Aorta Stomach Spleen
Figure FigureII 3II 735.76. AAbdbodmomene:n: CT, CT1T2, T12
174
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Ascending Descending
Liver Colon Aorta Stomach Colon
All
From
rightsthe
Inc.
GrouIpM,C,
©
reserved.
Deve2l0o1p0ment
DxR
DxR
2010
Development Spleen
reserved
©
IMC,
Group,
theIrnigch.ts
From
All
Inferior Vena Cava Diaphragm Left Kidney
Figure II 3 76. Abdomen: CT, T12
Figure II 3 77. Abdomen: CT,T12
Superior
Mesenteric Splenic
Liver Pancreas Artery Vein Spleen
All
From
rigIhntctsh.e
GrIoMupC,,
©
reserved.
Development
2010
DxR
DxR
2010
Development
reserved.
©
IMC,
Group,
therights
Inc.
From
All
Right Kidney Inferior Portal Aorta Left Kidney
Vena Cava Vein
Left Adrenal Gland
Figure FigureII 3II 737.78. AAbdbodmomene:n: CT, CLT1, L1
175
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Superior Superior
Ascending Mesenteric Mesenteric
Colon Duodenum Vein Artery Jejunum
Pharmacology Biochemistry All
From
rightsthe
IMC,
©
reserved.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
2010
DxR
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Development
Group,
Microbiology Inc.
Right Renal Inferior Aorta Descending
Kidney Pelvis Vena Cava Colon
Figure II 3 78. Abdomen: CT, L2
Figure II 3 79. Abdomen: CT, L2
Superior
Inferior Mesenteric
Duodenum Vena Cava Artery Aorta
All
From
riIgnhct.tshe
Group,
IMC,
©
reserved.
Development
2010
DxR
DxR
2010
Dreesveervloepdment
©
IMC,
Group,
therights
Inc.
From
All
Right Kidney Right Ureter Left Psoas Major
Figure II 3 79. Abdomen: CT, L3
Figure II 3 80. Abdomen: CT, L3
176
CHAPTER 3 | ABDOMEN, PELVIS, AND PERINEUM
Inferior Left Common
Ureter Vena Cava Iliac Artery
All
From
rigIhntcst.he
Group,
IMC,
©
reserved.
Development
2010
DxR
DxR
2010
Dreesveerlvoepdment
©
IMC,
Group,
therights
Inc.
From
All
Psoas Right Common Ureter
Major Iliac Artery
Figure II 3 80. Abdomen: CT, L4
Figure II 3 81. Abdomen: CT, L4
177

4#
Upper Limb
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Solve problems concerning the brachial plexus
❏ Answer questions about muscle innervation
❏ Solve problems concerning sensory innervation and nerve injuries
❏ Solve problems concerning upper and lower brachial plexus lesions
❏ Use knowledge of lesions of branches of the brachial plexus
❏ Use knowledge of arterial supply and major anastomoses
❏ Solve problems concerning carpal tunnel
❏ Interpret scenarios on rotator cuff
❏ Use knowledge of radiology
BRACHIAL PLEXUS
The brachial plexus provides the motor and sensory innervation to the upper limb
and is formed by the ventral rami of C5 through T1 spinal nerves. Five major
nerves arise from the brachial plexus:
• The musculocutaneous, median, and ulnar nerves contain anterior
division fibers and innervate muscles in the anterior arm, anterior
forearm, and palmar compartments that function mainly as flexors.
• The axillary and radial nerves contain posterior division fibers and
innervate muscles in the posterior arm and posterior forearm compart
ments that function mainly as extensors.
17
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Terminal Branches: (5) Cords: (3) Divisions (6) Trunks (3) Roots (5)
Mus, Med, Uln Lat & Med Ant
Rad, Axil Post Post
Pharmacology Biochemistry
C5
Suprascapular
nerve S u pe rio r
Physiology MedicalGenetics C6
M id dle
e
ra l C7
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences L
at
o r In fe rior C8
Musculocutaneous os
te ri
nerve T1
Microbiology
Axillary nerve Medial
Radial nerve Long thoracic
nerve
Median nerve
Ulnar nerve
Figure II 4 1. Brachial Plexus
Figure II 4 1. Brachial Plexus
MUSCLE INNERVATION
Terminal Nerves of Upper Limbs
The motor innervation by the 5 terminal nerves of the arm muscles is summarized
below.
180
CHAPTER 4 | UPPER LIMB
Table II 4 1. Major Motor Innervations by the 5 Terminal Nerves
Terminal Nerve Muscles Innervated Primary Actions
Musculocutaneous All the muscles of the anterior Flex elbow
nerve C5–6 compartment of the arm
Supination (biceps brachii)
Median nerve A. Forearm Flex wrist and all digits
C5–T1 • Anterior compartment except Pronation
1.5 muscles by ulnar nerve
(flexor carpi ulnaris and the
ulnar half of the flexor digito
rum profundus)
B. Hand Opposition of thumb
• Thenar compartment
Flex metacarpophalangeal (MP) and
• Central compartment extend interphalangeal (PIP and DIP)
Lumbricals: Digits 2 and 3 joints of digits 2 and 3
Ulnar nerve A. Forearm Flex wrist (weak) and digits 4 and 5
C8–T1 Anterior Compartment: 1 [1/2]
muscles not innervated by the
median nerve
B. Hand Dorsal – Abduct digits 2 5 (DAB)
• Hypothenar compartment Palmar – Adduct digits 2 5 (PAD)
• Central compartment Assist Lumbricals in MP flexion and
IP extension digits 2–5
– Interossei muscles:
Palmar and Dorsal
• Lumbricals: Digits 4 & 5 Flex MP and extend PIP & DIP joints
of digits 4 and 5
• Adductor pollicis
Adduct the thumb
Axillary nerve Deltoid Abduct shoulder—15°–110°
C5–6 Teres minor Lateral rotation of shoulder
Radial nerve Posterior compartment muscles of Extend MP, wrist, and elbow
the arm and forearm
C5–T1 Supination (supinator muscle)
18
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Collateral Nerves
In addition to the 5 terminal nerves, there are several collateral nerves that arise
from the brachial plexus proximal to the terminal nerves (i.e., from the rami,
trunks, or cords). These nerves innervate proximal limb muscles (shoulder girdle
Pharmacology Biochemistry
muscles). Table II 4 2 summarizes the collateral nerves.
Table II 4 2. The Collateral Nerves of the Brachial Plexus
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Collateral Nerve Muscles or Skin Innervated
Dorsal scapular nerve Rhomboids
Long thoracic nerve Serratus anterior—protracts and rotates
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
scapula superiorly
Suprascapular nerve Supraspinatus—abduct shoulder 0–15°
C5–6
Infraspinatus—laterally rotate shoulder
Microbiology
Lateral pectoral nerve Pectoralis major
Medial pectoral nerve Pectoralis major and minor
Upper subscapular Subscapularis
nerve
Middle subscapular Latissimus dorsi
(thoracodorsal) nerve
Lower subscapular Subscapularis and teres major
nerve
Medial brachial cutane Skin of medial arm
ous nerve
Medial antebrachial Skin of medial forearm
cutaneous nerve
Segmental Innervation
The segmental innervation to the muscles of the upper limbs has a
gradient, i.e., the more proximal muscles are innervated by theproxhimigahle–rdistal
segments (C5 and C6) and the more distal muscles are innervated by the lower
segments (C8 and T1). Therefore, the intrinsic shoulder muscles are innervated by
C5 and C6, the intrinsic hand muscles are innervated by C8 and T1, the distal arm
and proximal forearm muscles are innervated by C6 and C7, and the more distal
forearm muscles are innervated by C7 and C8.
Sensory Innervation
The skin of the palm is supplied by the median and ulnar nerves. The median
supplies the lateral 31⁄2 digits and the adjacent area of the lateral palm and the
thenar eminence. The ulnar supplies the medial 11⁄2 digits and skin of the
hypothenar eminence. The radial nerve supplies skin of the dorsum of the hand in
the area of the first dorsal web space, including the skin over the anatomic
snuffbox.
18
CHAPTER 4 | UPPER LIMB
Palm sensation is not affected by
carpal tunnel syndrome; the superficial
palmar cutaneous branch of median nerve
passes superficial to the carpal tunnel.
Anterior Posterior
(palmar) (dorsal)
Musculocutaneous nerve
(C5–C6) lateral forearm (C8–T1)
medial
Radial nerve forearm
C6 dermatome
C8 dermatome
Ulnar nerve
Ulnar nerve 31⁄2
31⁄2
11⁄2
11⁄2
Median nerve
Figure II 4 2. Sensory Innervation of the Hand and Forearm
Figure II 4 2. Sensory Innervation of the Hand and Forearm
BRACHIAL PLEXUS INJURIES
On the exam, follow clues as to the location of the injury. An injury will manifest
in symptoms distal to the site of injury. Without specifically naming all the
muscles, assign a function to the various compartments of the limbs. For example,
posterior arm = extension of the forearm and shoulder.
List the nerve(s) that innervate those muscles or that area. For example, posterior
arm = radial nerve.
You have an area of the limb, a function of the muscles within that area, and a
nerve responsible for that function.
Now you can damage a nerve and note what function(s) is lost or weakened.
Upper (C5 and C6) Brachial Plexus Lesion: Erb Duchenne Palsy
(Waiter’s Tip Syndrome)
• Usually occurs when the head and shoulder are forcibly separated (e.g.,
accident or birth injury or herniation of disk)
• Trauma will damage C5 and C6 spinal nerves (roots) of the upper trunk.
• Primarily affects the axillary, suprascapular, and musculocutaneous
nerves with the loss of intrinsic muscles of the shoulder and muscles of
the anterior arm.
18
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
• The arm is medially rotated and adducted at the shoulder: loss of axillary
and suprascapular nerves. The unopposed latissimus dorsi and pectoralis
major muscles pull the limb into adduction and medial rotation at the
shoulder.
Pharmacology Biochemistry
• The forearm is extended and pronated: loss of musculocutaneous nerve.
• Sign is “waiter’s tip.”
• Sensory loss on lateral forearm to base of thumb: loss of musculocutaneous
Physiology MedicalGenetics nerve
Lower (C8 and T1) Brachial Plexus Lesion: klumpke’s Paralysis
• Usually occurs when the upper limb is forcefully abducted above the head
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
(e.g., grabbing an object when falling, thoracic outlet syndrome or birth
injury)
• Trauma will injure the C8 and T1 spinal nerve roots of inferior trunk.
• Primarily affects the ulnar nerve and the intrinsic muscles of the hand with
Microbiology
a weakness of the median innervated muscles of the hand (Figure II 4 1)
• Sign is combination of “claw hand” and “ape hand” (median nerve).
• May include a Horner syndrome.
• Sensory loss on medial forearm and medial 11⁄2 digits
Table II 4 3. Lesions of Roots of Brachial Plexus
Lesioned Root C5 C6 C8 T1
Dermatome Lateral border Lateral forearm Medial forearm Medial arm to
paresthesia of upper arm to thumb to little finger elbow
Muscles Deltoid Biceps Finger flexors Hand muscles
affected
Rotator cuff Brachioradialis Wrist flexors
Serratus Brachialis Hand muscles
anterior
Supinator
Biceps
Brachioradialis
Reflex test — Biceps tendon — —
Causes of Upper trunk Upper trunk Lower trunk Lower trunk
lesions compression compression compression compression
18
CHAPTER 4 | UPPER LIMB
LESIONS OF BRANCHES OF THE BRACHIAL PLEXUS
• Sensory deficits precede motor weakness
• Proximal lesions: more signs
Radial Nerve
Axilla: (Saturday night palsy or using crutches)
• Loss of extension at the elbow, wrist and MP joints
• Weakened supination
• Sensory loss on posterior arm, forearm, and dorsum of thumb
• Distal sign is “wrist drop.”
Mid shaft of humerus at radial groove or lateral elbow (lateral epicondyle or radial
head dislocation)
• Loss of forearm extensors of the wrist and MP joints
• Weakened supination
• Sensory loss on the posterior forearm and dorsum of thumb
• Distal sign is “wrist drop.”
Note: Lesions of radial nerve distal to axilla, elbow extension are spared.
Wrist: laceration
• No motor loss
• Sensory loss only on dorsal aspect of thumb (first dorsal web space)
Median Nerve
Elbow: (Supracondylar fracture of humerus)
• Weakened wrist flexion (with ulnar deviation)
• Loss of pronation
• Loss of digital flexion of lateral 3 digits resulting in the inability to make a
complete fist; sign is “hand of benediction”
• Loss of thumb opposition (opponens pollicis muscle); sign is ape (simian)
hand
• Loss of first 2 lumbricals
• Thenar atrophy (flattening of thenar eminence)
• Sensory loss on palmar surface of the lateral hand and the palmar surfaces
of the lateral 31⁄2 digits
Note: A lesion of median nerve at elbow results in the “hand of benediction”
and “ape hand.”
18
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Wrist: carpal tunnel or laceration
• Loss of thumb opposition (opponens pollicis muscle); sign is ape or
simian hand
Pharmacology Biochemistry • Loss of first 2 lumbricals
• Thenar atrophy (flattening of thenar eminence)
• Sensory loss on the palmar surfaces of lateral 31⁄2 digits. Note sensory loss
on lateral palm may be spared.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Note: Lesions of median nerve at the wrist present without benediction hand
and with normal wrist flexion, digital flexion, and pronation.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Ulnar Nerve
Elbow (medial epicondyle), wrist (lacerations), or fracture of hook of hamate
• Loss of hypothenar muscles, third and fourth lumbricals, all interossei and
Microbiology
adductor pollicis
• With elbow lesion there is minimal weakening of wrist flexion with radial
deviation
• Loss of abduction and adduction of digits 2–5 (interossei muscles)
• Weakened interphalangeal (IP) extension of digits 2–5 (more pronounced
in digits 4 and 5)
• Loss of thumb adduction
• Atrophy of the hypothenar eminence
• Sign is “claw hand.” Note that clawing is greater with a wrist lesion.
• Sensory loss on medial 11⁄2 digits
Axillary Nerve
Fracture of the surgical neck of the humerus or inferior dislocation of the shoulder
• Loss of abduction of the arm to the horizon
• Sensory lost over the deltoid muscle
Musculocutaneous Nerve
• Loss of elbow flexion and weakness in supination
• Loss of sensation on lateral aspect of the forearm
Long Thoracic Nerve
• Often damaged during a radical mastectomy or a stab wound to the lateral
chest (nerve lies on superficial surface of serratus anterior muscle).
18
CHAPTER 4 | UPPER LIMB
• Loss of abduction of the arm above the horizon to above the head
• Sign of “winged scapula”; patient unable to hold the scapula against the
posterior thoracic wall
Suprascapular Nerve
• Loss of shoulder abduction between 0 and 15 degrees (supraspinatus
muscle)
• Weakness of lateral rotation of shoulder (infraspinatus muscle)
Table II 4 4. Effects of Lesions to Branches of the Brachial Plexus
Musculo
Lesioned Axillary Radial Median Ulnar
cutaneous
Nerve (C5, C6) (C5, C6, C7, C8) (C6, C7, C8, T1) (C8, T1)
(C5, C6, C7)
Altered Lateral arm Lateral Dorsum of hand Lateral 31⁄2 Medial 11⁄2 digits;
sensation forearm over first dorsal digits; lateral medial palm
interosseous and palm
anatomic snuffbox
Motor Abduction at Flexion of Wrist extension Wrist flexion Wrist flexion
weakness shoulder forearm
Metacarpophalan Finger flexion Finger spreading
Supination geal extension
Pronation Thumb adduction
Supination
Thumb Finger extension
opposition
Common — — Wrist drop Ape hand Claw hand
sign of
Hand of Radial deviation
lesion
benediction at wrist
Ulnar devia
tion at wrist
Causes of Surgical neck Rarely Saturday night palsy Carpal tunnel Fracture of medial
lesions fracture of lesioned compression epicondyle of
Midshaft fracture of
humerus humerus
humerus Supracondylar
Dislocated fracture of Fracture of hook
Subluxation of
humerus humerus of hamate
radius
Pronator teres Fracture of
Dislocated humerus
syndrome clavicle
18
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
ARTERIAL SUPPLY AND MAJOR ANASTOMOSES
Arterial Supply to the Upper Limb
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Subclavian artery
Branch of brachiocephalic trunk on the right and aortic arch on the left.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Axillary artery
• From the first rib to the posterior edge of the teres major muscle
• Three major branches:
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
– Lateral thoracic artery—supplies mammary gland; runs with long
thoracic nerve
– Subscapular artery—collateral to shoulder with suprascapular branch of
subclavian artery
Microbiology
– Posterior humeral circumflex artery—at surgical neck with axillary nerve
Brachial artery
Profunda brachii artery with radial nerve in radial groove—at midshaft of
humerus
Radial artery
Deep palmar arch
Ulnar artery
• Common interosseus artery
• Superficial palmar arch
18
CHAPTER 4 | UPPER LIMB
Suprascapular artery
Subclavian artery Brachiocephalic trunk
Clavicle
1st rib (landmark)
Axillary artery
Aortic arch
Anterior humeral circumflex artery
Superior thoracic artery
Posterior humeral circumflex artery
(surgical neck with axillary nerve) Thoracoacromial artery
Teres major
Pectoralis minor
Profunda brachii artery
(radial groove with radial nerve)
Lateral thoracic artery
(with long thoracic nerve)
Brachial artery
Subscapular artery
Radial collateral artery
Superior ulnar collateral artery
Inferior ulnar collateral artery
Radial artery
Common interosseus artery
(courses in snuffbox)
Ulnar artery
Deep palmar arch (radial)
Superficial palmar arch (ulnar)
Figure FigurIeI 4 II3.4 A3.rteAriartlerial SSuuppppllyy to thtoe tUhpeper UpLpiemrb Limb
18
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Collateral Circulation
Shoulder
Pharmacology Biochemistry Subscapular branch of axillary and suprascapular branch of subclavian arteries
Hand
Physiology MedicalGenetics Superficial and deep palmar arches
CARPAL TUNNEL
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
The carpal tunnel is the fibro osseous tunnel located on the ventral aspect of the
wrist. The tunnel is bounded anteriorly by the flexor retinaculum and posteri
orly by the proximal row of carpal bones (lunate).
• The carpal tunnel transmits 9 tendons and the radial and ulnar bursae (4
Microbiology
tendons of the flexor digitorum superficialis, 4 tendons of the flexor
digitorum profundus, and the tendon of the flexor pollicis longus) and
the median nerve.
• There are no blood vessels or any branches of the radial or ulnar nerves in
the carpal tunnel.
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
Entrapment of the median nerve and other structures in the carpal tunnel due to
any condition that reduces the space results in carpal tunnel syndrome. The
median nerve is the only nerve affected and the patient will present with atrophy
of the thenar compartment muscles and weakness of the thenar muscles (opposi
tion of the thumb—ape hand).
There is also sensory loss and numbness on the palmar surfaces of the lateral 31⁄2
digits. The skin on the lateral side of the palm (thenar eminence) is spared because
the palmar cutaneous branch of the median nerve which supplies the lateral
palm, enters the hand superficial to the flexor retinaculum and does not course
through the carpal tunnel.
CLINICAL CORRELATE Ulnar nerve and artery
Carpal tunnel syndrome compresses the Pisiform
median nerve.
Flexor retinaculum
Carpal tunnel Median nerve
Triquetrum Tubercle of scaphoid
Lunate
Scaphoid
FigFuirgeure IIII4 44. 4C.arpaClarpalTunnel TunatnelProximalat PRrooxwimaolf Carpal Bone
Row of Carpal Bones
190
CHAPTER 4 | UPPER LIMB
ROTATOR CUFF CLINICAL CORRELATE
The tendons of rotator cuff muscles strengthen the glenohumeral joint and include Humeral Head Dislocation
the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor, and subscapularis (SITS) muscles.
Dislocation of the humeral head
The tendons of the muscles of the rotator cuff may become torn or inflamed.
from the glenohumeral joint
The tendon of the supraspinatus is most commonly affected. Patients with rotator typically occurs through the inferior
cuff tears experience pain anteriorly and superiorly to the glenohumeral joint portion of the joint capsule where
during abduction
the capsule is the slackest and is
not reinforced by a rotator cuff
Clavicle (cut) tendon (Figure II4 5). After inferior
dislocation, the humeral head is
Acromion (cut) pulled superiorly and comes to lie
Capsular ligament anterior to the glenohumeral joint.
Supraspinatus
Synovial membrane
tendon Dislocation may injure the axillary
Glenoid labrum or radial nerve.
Glenoid cavity
Deltoid
Axillary recess CLINICAL CORRELATE
muscle
A rupture or tear of the rotator
Axillary nerve cuff follows chronic use of the
shoulder or a fall with an
Radial nerve
abducted upper limb. The
supraspinatus muscle is the most
frequently damaged muscle of the
Clavicle
rotator cuff.
Acromion S Coracoid process
I Superior glenohumeral
ligament
Posterior Biceps brachii Anterior
SC
tendon (cut)
T
Inferior glenohumeral
Supraspinatus (S) ligament
Rotator
Infraspinatus (I)
cuff
Teres minor (T)
Subscapularis (SC)
Inferior and anterior
shoulder dislocation
FigFuigreure IIII4 45. R5.otatoRrotatorCuff Cuff
19
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
CLINICAL CORRELATE RADIOLOGY
Humeral Surgical Neck Fracture
Glenoid Humeral Greater
The axillary nerve accompanies the posterior
Clavicle Coracoid fossa Acromion head tubercle
Pharmacology Biochemistry
humeral circumflex artery as it passes
around the surgical neck of the humerus. A All
From
fracture in this area could lacerate both the
righttshe
artery and nerve. Inc.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
GrouIpM,C,
Mid Shaft (Radial Groove) Humeral ©
reserved.
Fracture
Deve2l0o1p0ment
The radial nerve accompanies the profunda DxR
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
brachii artery. Both could be damaged as a
result of a mid shaft humeral fracture. DxR
2010Development
reserved
©
Microbiology
IMCG,roup,
therIingch.ts
From
All
Surgical neck of Mid shaft of
humerus (axillary nerve groove (rhaudmiaelrus—radinaelrve
and posterior circumflex and profunda brachii artery)
humeral artery)
Figure II 4 6. Upper Extremities: Anteroposterior View of Shoulder
Figure II 4 6. Upper Extremities: Anteroposterior
(External Rotation)
View of Shoulder (External Rotation)
Location of
median nerve
Medial epicondyle
of humerus (Location
Lateral epicondyle
of ulnar nerve)
(location of
radial nerve)
Capitulum
of humerus Coronoid process
of ulna
Radial head
Radial
Ulna
tuberosity
FrFormom thetheIMCIM,C,© 20©102010DxRDxRDeveDloepvmeleonptment
Group, Inc. All rights reserved.
Group, Inc. All rights reserved.
Figure II 4Fig7u.re UppeIIr 4 7. EUxptrpeemrities:Extremities: AnteArnotpeorsotpeorisoterrior ViewVieowf Elbowof Elbow
192
CHAPTER 4 | UPPER LIMB
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Capitate Trapezoid Trapezium
The scaphoid is the most frequently
fractured of the carpal bones. This fracture
From
may separate the proximal head of the
the
Hook of scaphoid from its blood supply (which
Hamate IMC,
© enters the bone at the distal head) and may
Hamate 2010 result in avascular necrosis of the proximal
head.
DxR
Course of
The lunate is the most commonly dislocated
Ulnar Nerve
carpal bone (it dislocates anteriorly into the
Triquetrum
Developcmarepnatl tunnel and may compress the median
Pisiform
nerve).
Group,
Course of
Inc.
Median Nerve
All
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Ulna rights • Carpal tunnel syndrome results from
compression of the median nerve
reserved within the tunnel.
Lunate Scaphoid Radius • A fall on the outstretched hand may
From the IMC, © 2010 DxR Development Group, Inc. All rights reserved. fracture the hook of the hamate,
Figure II 4 8. Upper Extremities: Posteroanterior View of Wrist
which may damage the ulnar nerve as
Figure II 4 8. Upper Extremities: Posteroanterior View of Wrist
it passes into the hand.
193

5#
Lower Limb
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Explain information related to lumbosacral plexus
❏ Solve problems concerning nerve injuries and abnormalities of gait
❏ Demonstrate understanding of arterial supply and major anastomoses
❏ Use knowledge of femoral triangle
❏ Demonstrate understanding of hip
❏ Explain information related to knee joint
❏ Use knowledge of ankle joint
❏ Solve problems concerning radiology
LUMBOSACRAL PLEXUS
The lumbosacral plexus provides the motor and sensory innervation to the lower
limb and is formed by ventral rami of the L2 through S3 spinal nerves.
The major nerves of the plexus are:
• Femoral nerve: posterior divisions of L2 through L4
• Obturator nerve: anterior divisions of L2 through L4
• Tibial nerve: anterior divisions of L4 through S3
• Common fibular nerve: posterior divisions of L4 through S2
• Superior gluteal nerve: posterior divisions of L4 through S1
• Inferior gluteal nerve: posterior divisions of L5 through S2
The tibial nerve and common fibular nerve travel together through the gluteal
region and thigh in a common connective tissue sheath; together, they are called
the sciatic nerve.
The common fibular nerve divides in the proximal leg into the superficial and
deep fibular nerve.
19
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
L2
L3
Pharmacology Biochemistry
L4
Femoral nerve L5
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Obturator nerve
Superior gluteal nerve S1
Inferior gluteal nerve
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences S2
Common fibular nerve
Tibial nerve
S3
Microbiology Sciatic nerve
FFiigguurree II 5II1.5 Lu1m.bosLaucmrablosacral Plexus Plexus
Terminal Nerves of Lumbosacral Plexus
The terminal nerves of the lumbosacral plexus are described below.
Table II 5 1. Terminal Nerves of Lumbosacral Plexus
Terminal Nerve Origin Muscles Innervated Primary Actions
Femoral nerve L2–L4 posterior Anterior compartment of thigh (quadriceps femo Extend knee
divisions ris, sartorius, pectineus)
Flex hip
Obturator L2–L4 anterior Medial compartment of thigh (gracilis, adductor Adduct thigh
nerve divisions longus, adductor brevis, anterior portion of adduc
Medially rotate thigh
tor magnus)
Tibial nerve L4–S3 anterior Posterior compartment of thigh (semimembrano Flex knee
divisions sus, semitendinosus, long head of biceps femoris, Extend thigh
posterior portion of adductor magnus)
Posterior compartment of leg (gastrocnemius, Plantar flex foot
soleus, flexor digitorum longus, flexor hallucis (S1–2)
longus, tibialis posterior) Flex digits
Plantar muscles of foot Inversion
Common L4–S2 posterior Short head of biceps femoris Flex knee
fibular nerve divisions
Superficial Lateral compartment of leg (fibularis longus, Eversion
fibular nerve fibularis brevis)
Deep fibular Anterior compartment of leg (tibialis anterior, Dorsiflex foot (L4–5)
nerve extensor hallucis, extensor digitorum, fibularis
Extend digits
tertius)
Inversion
19
CHAPTER 5 | LOWER LIMB
Collateral Nerves of Lumbosacral Plexus
The collateral nerves of the lumbosacral plexus (to the lower limb) are summa
rized below.
Table II 5 2. Collateral Nerves of Lumbosacral Plexus
Collateral Nerve Origin Muscles or Skin Innervated Primary Actions
Superior gluteal nerve L4–S1 posterior divisions Gluteus medius, gluteus Stabilize pelvis
minimus, tensor fasciae latae
Abduct hip
Inferior gluteal nerve L5–S2 posterior divisions Gluteus maximus Extension of hip
Lateral rotation of
thigh
Segmental Innervation to Muscles of Lower Limb
The segmental innervation to the muscles of the lower limb has a proximal–distal
gradient, i.e., the more proximal muscles are innervated by the higher segments
and the more distal muscles are innervated by the lower segments.
• Muscles that cross the anterior side of the hip are innervated by L2 and
L3
• Muscles that cross the anterior side of the knee are innervated by
L3 and L4
• Muscles that cross the anterior side of the ankle are innervated by L4 and
L5 (dorsiflexion)
• Muscles that cross the posterior side of the hip are innervated by L4
and L5
• Muscles that cross the posterior side of the knee are innervated by
L5 and S1
• Muscles that cross the posterior side of the ankle are innervated by S1
and S2 (plantar flexion)
19
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
NERVE INJURIES AND ABNORMALITIES OF GAIT
Superior Gluteal Nerve
Pharmacology Biochemistry
• Weakness in abduction of the hip
• Impairment of gait; patient cannot keep pelvis level when standing on one
leg.
• Sign is “Trendelenburg gait.”
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Inferior Gluteal Nerve
• Weakened hip extension
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
• Difficulty rising from a sitting position or climbing stairs
Femoral Nerve
Microbiology
• Weakened hip flexion
• Weakened extension of the knee
• Sensory loss on the anterior thigh, medial leg, and foot
Obturator Nerve
• Loss of adduction of the thigh as well as sensory loss on medial thigh
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Sciatic Nerve
The common fibular nerve crosses the
• Weakened extension of the thigh
lateral aspect of the knee at the neck of the
fibula, where it is the most frequently • Loss of flexion of the knee
damaged nerve of the lower limb. Patients • Loss of all functions below the knee
will present with loss of dorsiflexion at the
• Sensory loss on the posterior thigh, leg (except medial side), and foot
ankle (foot drop), loss of eversion, and
sensory loss on the lateral surface of the leg
and the dorsum of the foot. Tibial nerve only
• Weakness in flexion of the knee
The common fibular nerve may be
compressed by the piriformis muscle when • Weakness in plantar flexion
the nerve passes through the piriformis • Weakened inversion
instead of inferior to the muscle with the
• Sensory loss on the leg (except medial) and plantar foot
tibial nerve. Piriformis syndrome results in
motor and sensory loss to the lateral and
anterior compartments of the leg. Common fibular nerve
Produces a combination of deficits of lesions of the deep and superficial fibular
nerves
Deep fibular nerve
• Weakened inversion
• Loss of extension of the digits
19
CHAPTER 5 | LOWER LIMB
• Loss of dorsiflexion (“foot drop”)
• Sensory loss limited to skin of the first web space between the great and
second toes
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Superficial fibular nerve
• Loss of eversion of the foot The sciatic nerve is often damaged following
posterior hip dislocation. A complete sciatic
• Sensory loss on anterolateral leg and dorsum of the foot, except for the
nerve lesion results in sensory and motor
first web space
deficits in the posterior compartment of the
thigh and all functions below the knee.
Sensory Innervation of the Lower Leg and Foot
• The lateral leg and the dorsum of the foot are supplied mainly by the
superficial fibular nerve, with the exception of the first dorsal web space,
which is supplied by the deep fibular nerve.
• The sole of the foot is supplied by the lateral and medial plantar branches
of the tibial nerve.
• The sural nerve (a combination of both peroneal and tibial branches)
supplies the posterior leg and lateral side of the foot.
• The saphenous nerve (a branch of the femoral nerve) supplies the medial
leg and medial foot.
Sural
nerve
Superficial
fibular nerve Saphenous
nerve Sural
nerve
Sural
Medial
nerve
plantar nerve
Deep
Tibial nerve
fibular
Lateral
nerve
plantar nerve
Figure II 5 2. SensoryII 5 2. ISnennesrvoarytion Innervation of thoef theLowLeorwer LLeegg andandFoot FootFigure
19
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
ARTERIAL BLOOD SUPPLY
The obturator artery supplies the medial compartment of the thigh.
• External iliac artery
Pharmacology Biochemistry
• Femoral artery
– Profunda femoris artery
o Medial circumflex femoral artery—supplies head of femur (avascular
Physiology MedicalGenetics
necrosis)
o Lateral circumflex femoral artery
o Perforating arteries—supplies posterior compartment of thigh
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences • Popliteal artery: supplies knee joint
– Anterior tibial artery: courses with deep fibular nerve in anterior
compartment of leg
o Dorsalis pedis artery: pulse on dorsum of foot lateral to extensor
Microbiology
hallucis longus tendon; used to note quality of blood supply to foot
– Posterior tibial artery: courses with tibial nerve in posterior compart
ment of leg and passes posterior to the medial malleolus
o Fibular artery: supplies lateral compartment of leg
o Plantar arterial arch
o Lateral plantar artery
o Medial plantar artery
20
CHAPTER 5 | LOWER LIMB
External iliac artery
Inguinal ligament
Femoral artery
Lateral circumflex
Femoral triangle
femoral artery
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Deep femoral artery
Medial circumflex
Tibial shaft fractures can cause lacerations
femoral artery
of the anterior or posterior tibial arteries,
producing either anterior or posterior
compartment syndromes.
Popliteal artery Popliteal artery
Anterior tibial artery
Posterior tibial artery
Anterior tibial artery
Fibular artery
Medial plantar artery
Dorsalis pedis artery
Lateral plantar arter
Plantar arch artery
Arterial supply
to lower limb
Anterior Posterior
Figure FigureII 5II35. 3A.rtAerritaelrial SuSpupplpyly to LotowerLowLeimrb Limb
FEMORAL TRIANGLE
The femoral triangle is bounded by the inguinal ligament, and the sartorius and
adductor longus muscles. Within the triangle are the femoral sheath (containing
the femoral artery and vein and canal) and the femoral nerve (which is outside of
the femoral sheath).
Passing under the inguinal ligament (from lateral to medial) are the femoral nerve,
femoral artery, femoral vein, an empty space within the femoral sheath called the
femoral canal, and inguinal lymph nodes within the femoral canal (NAVEL). The
femoral canal is the site of femoral hernias.
201
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
HIP
The hip joint is formed by the head of the femur and the acetabulum.
The fibrous capsule of the hip joint is reinforced by 3 ligamentous thickenings:
Pharmacology Biochemistry
iliofemoral ligament, ischiofemoral ligament, and pubofemoral ligament.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Ligamentum
capitis femorum
(round ligament) (cut) Anterior superior
iliac spine
Microbiology
Head of femur Anterior inferior
iliac spine
Greater trochanter Iliopubic eminence
Acetabular labrum
Neck of femur
Transverse acetabular
Iliofemoral ligament ligament
and joint capsule
Figure II 5 4. Hip
Figure II 5 4. Hip
Most of the blood supply to the head of the femur (arising mostly from the medial
femoral circumflex artery) ascends along the neck of the femur. Fracture of the
femoral neck can compromise this blood supply and lead to avascular necrosis of
the head of the femur.
20
CHAPTER 5 | LOWER LIMB
kNEE JOINT
The knee joint is a synovial joint formed by the articulations of the medial and
lateral femoral condyles, the medial and lateral tibial condyles, and the patella.
The primary movement at the knee joint is flexion and extension of the leg.
The knee joint is a weight bearing joint, and its stability depends on the muscles
(quadriceps and hamstring muscles) that cross the joint. The knee is strengthened
by several sets of ligaments.
Posterior
cruciate Anterior
Anterior cruciate ligament
ligament
cruciate ligament
Lateral condyle
Lateral condyle
Medial
condyle
Lateral meniscus
Lateral meniscus
Medial
Popliteus ligament
meniscus
Popliteus ligament
Transverse
Fibular (lateral) ligament Fibular
collateral ligament
collateral ligament
Tibial (medial)
collateral ligament Fibula
Tibial
tuberosity
Anterior Posterior
Figure II 5 5. Structures of the Knee
Figure II 5 5. Structures of the Knee
Tibial (Medial) and Fibular (Lateral) Collateral Ligaments CLINICAL CORRELATE
Tibial collateral ligament extends from the medial epicondyle of the femur The tibial collateral ligament is the most
inferiorly to attach to the medial aspect of the tibia. It is firmly attached to the
frequently torn ligament at the knee,
capsule and medial meniscus. The tibial ligament prevents lateral displacement
commonly seen following lateral trauma to
(abduction) of the tibia under the femur.
the knee.
Fibular collateral ligament extends from the lateral condyle of the femur
inferiorly to attach to the head of the fibula and is not attached to the lateral
meniscus. The fibular ligament prevents medial displacement (adduction) of the
tibia under the femur.
The collateral ligaments are taut with extension of the knee.
20
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
CLINICAL CORRELATE Anterior and Posterior Cruciate Ligaments
The tests for the integrity of the anterior and These are intracapsular ligaments but are located outside the synovial membrane.
posterior cruciate ligaments are the anterior
• Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) attaches to the anterior aspect of the
Pharmacologaynd posterior drawer signs. Biochemistry
tibia and courses superiorly, posteriorly, and laterally to attach to the
• Tearing of the anterior cruciate lateral condyle of the femur. The anterior ligament prevents anterior
displacement of the tibia under the femur. Tension on the ACL is greatest
ligaments allows the tibia to be easily
when the knee is extended and resists hyperextension. It is weaker than
pulled forward (anterior drawer sign).
Physiology MedicalGenetics the posterior cruciate ligament.
• Tearing of the posterior cruciate • Posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) attaches to the posterior aspect of the
ligament allows the tibial to be easily tibia and courses superiorly, anteriorly, and medially to attach to the
pulled posteriorly (posterior drawer medial condyle of the femur. The PCL prevents posterior displacement of
the tibia under the femur. Tension on the PCL is greatest when the knee is
Pathology sign). BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
flexed.
Microbiology
Femur Femur Anterior
cruciate
Posterior ligament
cruciate
ligament
Anterior cruciate
ligament (cut)
Posterior Anterior
Posterior cruciate
Tibia
Tibia ligament (cut)
Figure II 5 6. Anterior an⯑ Posterior ⯑ruciate ⯑igaments
Figure II 5 6. Anterior and Posterior Cruciate Ligaments
Medial and Lateral Menisci
These are intracapsular wedges of fibrocartilage located between the articulating
condyles that help make the articulating surfaces more congruent and also serve as
shock absorbers.
• Medial meniscus is C shaped and is firmly attached to the tibial collateral
ligament. Therefore, it is less mobile and is more frequently injured than
the lateral meniscus.
• Lateral meniscus is circular and more mobile. It is not attached to the
fibular collateral ligament.
20
CHAPTER 5 | LOWER LIMB
Common knee Injuries
The 3 most commonly injured structures at the knee are the tibial collateral
ligament, the medial meniscus, and the ACL (the terrible or unhappy triad)—in
jury usually results from a blow to the lateral aspect of the knee with the foot on
the ground.
Patients with a medial meniscus tear have pain when the leg is medially rotated at
the knee.
ANkLE JOINT
Tibia
Lateral (collateral) ligament of ankle
Fibula
Posterior talofibular ligament
Calcaneofibular ligament
Anterior talofibular ligament
Tibia
Medial (deltoid) ligament of ankle
Posterior tibiotalar part
Tibiocalcaneal part
Tibionavicular part
Anterior tibiotalar part
CLINICAL CORRELATE
• Inversion sprains are most common.
• Anterior talofibular ligament is
Figure II 5 7. StructurIeIs 5 7. Structoufresthe ofAnkthleeFigAurnekle frequently damaged.
20
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
RADIOLOGY
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Lateral
Femoral
Condyle
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Lateral Patella Medial
femoral Femoral
Medial
condyle Condyle
femoral condyle
Lateral Fibular
Microbiology tibial condyle Medial tibial Head
condyle
Fibular head
Intercondylar
eminence
Fibular neck
From Frtohme IMthCe, I©MC2,010©D2x0R10 DDevxeRlopmeDnetvelopment Group, Inc. From th
Group,AllInrcig.htsAll rriegshetrsved.reserved. Group,
Figure II 5 Fi9g.ureLoweIIr 5 8. ELxotwreemrities:Extremities: AntAernotpeorospteorsioterrior View VioefwKneeof Knee Figure II 5 1
Lateral
Femoral
Condyle
Lateral Patella Medial
femoral Femoral Patella
condyle Medial Condyle
femoral condyle
Lateral Fibular
tibial condyle Medial tibial Head
condyle
Fibular head
Intercondylar
eminence
Fibular neck
From the IMC, © 2010 DxR Development FFrroomm tthhee IIMMCC,, ©©20210010 DDxRxRDeDveelvoeplompemntent Group, Inc.
Group, Inc. All rights reserved. AGlrloupri,ghtsInc.resAerlvlerdi.ghts reserved.
gure II 5 9. Lower Extremities: Anteroposterior View of Knee Figure FigurIeI 5II105. 9. LLoowweerr ExtrEemxtirteiemsi:ties: Lateral LKanteereal Knee
20
6#
Head and Neck
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Explain information related to neck
❏ Answer questions about carotid and subclavian arteries
❏ Demonstrate understanding of embryology of the head and neck
❏ Solve problems concerning cranium
❏ Answer questions about cranial meninges and dural venous sinuses
❏ Use knowledge of intracranial hemorrhage
❏ Interpret scenarios on orbital muscles and their innervation
NECk
The thoracic outlet is the space bounded by the manubrium, the first rib, and T1
vertebra. The interval between the anterior and middle scalene muscles and the
first rib (scalene triangle) transmits the structures coursing between the thorax,
upper limb and lower neck. The triangle contains the trunks of the brachial
plexus and the subclavian artery.
Thoracic outlet syndrome results from the compression of the trunks of the NOTE
brachial plexus and the subclavian artery within the scalene triangle. Compres
The subclavian vein and phrenic nerve
sion of these structures can result from tumors of the neck (Pancoast on apex of
lung), a cervical rib or hypertrophy of the scalene muscles. The lower trunk of the (C 3, 4, and 5) are on the anterior surface of
brachial plexus (C8, T1) is usually the first to be affected. Clinical symptoms the anterior scalene muscle, and not in the
include the following: scalene triangle.
• Numbness and pain on medial aspect of the forearm and hand
• Weakness of the muscles supplied by ulnar nerve in the hand (claw hand)
• Decreased blood flow into upper limb, indicated by weakened radial pulse
Compression can also affect the cervical sympathetic trunk (Horner’s syndrome)
and the recurrent laryngeal nerves (hoarseness).
20
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Sternocleidomastoid
Anterior scalene
Middle scalene
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Phrenic nerve
Brachial plexus
Trapezius
Physiology MedicalGenetics Subclavian vein
Clavicle (cut)
1st rib
Deltoid Subclavian artery
2nd rib
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Figure IFIigu6re 1. IISca6len1e. ScaleneTriangTleriangle ofofthtehe NNeecckk
Microbiology
20
CHAPTER 6 | HEAD AND NECk
CAROTID AND SUBCLAVIAN ARTERIES
Common Carotid Artery
A. Internal carotid
artery arteryan—dophthalbmraicin
B. External carotid artery
1. Superior thyroid
2. Ascending pharyngeal
(not shown)
3. Lingual
7 4. Facial
5. Occipital
6
8
6. Posterior auricular
5
7. Superficial temporal
8. Maxillary—deep face;
middle meningeal artery
A 4
B
3 Subclavian Artery
Common
9. Internal
carotid 1
btyhpoarascsic—cardiac
10. Vertebral—brain
13
11. Costocervical
14
15 12. Thyrocervical
Subclavian 10 13. Transverse cervical
12 14.
11
Suprascapular—collateratlos shoulder
15. Inferior thyroid
9
FigureFigure IIII66 22.. AArtertreierises to theto Hethaed aHndead Neckand Neck
CLINICAL CORRELATE
The most significant artery of the external
carotid system is the middle meningeal
artery. It arises from the maxillary artery in
the infratemporal fossa and enters the skull
through the foramen spinosum to supply
skull and dura. Lacerations of this vessel
result in an epidural hematoma.
20
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
EMBRYOLOGY OF THE HEAD AND NECk
Pharyngeal Apparatus
Pharmacology Biochemistry
The pharyngeal apparatus consists of the following:
• Pharyngeal arches (1, 2, 3, 4, and 6) composed of mesoderm and neural
crest
Physiology MedicalGenetics • Pharyngeal pouches (1, 2, 3, 4) lined with endoderm
• Pharyngeal grooves or clefts (1, 2, 3, and 4) lined with ectoderm
The anatomic associations relating to these structures in the fetus and adult are
summarized below.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Section level in Figure II 6 4
Microbiology
Mandibular swelling
4 6
and maxillary swelling 3
2
1
Upper limb bud
Somites
Lower limb bud
Figure II 6 3. The Fetal Pharyngeal Apparatus
Figure II 6 3. Fetal Pharyngeal Apparatus
Pharyngeal arch
Pharyngeal Pharyngeal
(mesoderm and
groove groove
neural crest)
1 1
1 1 Pharyngeal 1 1
2 pouch 2
2 2
2 Endoder 2
3 3
Developing 3 3 Ectoderm
pharynx 3 3
4 4
4 4
4
6 6 4
Figure II 6 4. Section through the Developing Pharynx
Figure II 6 4. Section through the Developing Pharynx
210
CHAPTER 6 | HEAD AND NECk
The components of the pharyngeal arches are summarized below.
Table II 6 1. Components of the Pharyngeal Arches
Nerve* (Neural Artery (Aortic Arch Skeletal/Cartilage
Arch Muscle (Mesoderm)
Ectoderm) Mesoderm) (Neural Crest)
1 Trigeminal: Four muscles of mastication: Maxilla
mandibular nerve
• Masseter Mandible
• Temporalis Incus
• Lateral pterygoid Malleus
• Medial pterygoid
Plus:
• Digastric (anterior belly)
• Mylohyoid
• Tensor tympani
• Tensor veli palatini
2 VII Muscles of facial expres Stapes
sion:
Styloid process
Plus:
Lesser horn and
• Digastric (posterior upper body of hyoid
belly) bone
• Stylohyoid
• Stapedius
3 IX Right and left Stylopharyngeus muscle Greater horn and
common carotid lower body of hyoid
arteries bone
Right and left
internal carotid
arteries
4 X Right subclavian Cricothyroid muscle Thyroid cartilage
artery (right arch)
– Superior Soft palate
laryngeal Arch of aorta (left
Pharynx (5 muscles)
nerve arch)
– Pharyngeal
branches
6 X Right and left Intrinsic muscles of larynx All other laryngeal
pulmonary arteries (except cricothyroid muscle) cartilages
Recurrent laryngeal
nerve Ductus arteriosus
(left arch)
*Nerves are not derived from pharyngeal arch; they grow into the arch.
Note: The ocular muscles (III, IV, VI) and the tongue muscles (XII) do not derive from pharyngeal arch mesoderm but from
mesoderm of the occipital somites (somitomeres).
21
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
The anatomic structures relating to the pharyngeal pouches are summarized
below.
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Auditory tube and
middle ear cavity
(pharyngeal pouch 1) Foregut
Foramen
External auditory 1
Physiology MedicalGenetics cecum
meatus (pharyngeal Site of
groove 1) 2 thyroid gland
development
Tympanic membrane 3
Path of
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences (pharyngeal membrane 1)
thyroglossal
SP 4
duct
Thyroid
C Gland
IP
Microbiology IP: inferior parathyroid gland
SP: superior parathyroid gland
T: thymus
T
C: c cells of thyroid
Figure II 6 5. Fetal Pharyngeal Pouches
Figure II 6 5. Fetal Pharyngeal Pouches
The adult structures derived from the fetal pharyngeal pouches are summarized
below.
CLINICAL CORRELATE Table II 6 2. Adult Structures Derived From the Fetal Pharyngeal Pouches
Normally, the second, third, and fourth
Pouch Adult Derivatives
pharyngeal grooves are obliterated by
1 Epithelial lining of auditory tube and middle ear cavity
overgrowth of the second pharyngeal arch.
Failure of a cleft to be completely 2 Epithelial lining of crypts of palatine tonsil
obliterated results in a branchial cyst or
3 Inferior parathyroid (IP) gland
lateral cervical cyst.
Thymus (T)
4 Superior parathyroid (SP) gland
CLINICAL CORRELATE
C cells of thyroid
The DiGeorge sequence presents with *Neural crest cells migrate to form parafollicular C cells of the thyroid.
immunologic problems and hypocalcemia,
and may be combined with cardiovascular
defects (persistent truncus arteriosus), Pharyngeal groove 1 gives rise to the epithelial lining of external auditory
abnormal ears, and micrognathia. meatus. All other grooves are obliterated.
21
CHAPTER 6 | HEAD AND NECk
Thyroid Gland
The thyroid gland does not develop from a pharyngeal pouch. It develops from the
thyroid diverticulum, which forms from the midline endoderm in the floor of the
pharynx.
• The thyroid diverticulum migrates caudally to its adult anatomic position
in the neck but remains connected to the foregut via the thyroglossal
duct, which is later obliterated.
• The former site of the thyroglossal duct is indicated in the adult by the
foramen cecum.
Tongue
The anterior two thirds of the tongue is associated with pharyngeal arches 1 and
2. General sensation is carried by the lingual branch of the mandibular nerve
(cranial nerve [CN] V). Taste sensation is carried by chorda tympani of CN VII.
The posterior one third of the tongue is associated with pharyngeal arch 3.
General sensation and taste are carried by CN IX.
Most of the muscles of the tongue are innervated by CN XII.
Circumvallate
papillae
Sensory
Posterior General sensation Taste
1/3
Post 1/3 IX IX
Ant 2/3 V VII
Lingual branch Chorda tympani
of mandibular branch of
Foramen
VII nerve
cecum
Foliate
papillae
Anterior Filiform Somatic Motor
2/3 papillae CN XII innervates the intrinsic and
Fungiform
extrinsic skeletal muscles of the
papillae
tongue except palatoglossus muscle.
FigFuigreure II 6 I6I. T6ong6u.e Tongue
21
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
CLINICAL CORRELATE Face and Palate
Cleft lip occurs when the maxillary The face develops from 5 primordia of mesoderm (neural crest) of the first
prominence fails to fuse with the medial pharyngeal arch: a single frontonasal prominence, the pair of maxillary promi
nences, and the pair of mandibular prominences.
Pharmacolognyasal prominence. Biochemistry
• The intermaxillary segment forms when the 2 medial nasal prominences
Cleft palate occurs when the palatine
of the frontonasal prominences fuse together at the midline and form the
shelves fail to fuse with each other or the
philtrum of the lip and the primary palate.
primary palate.
Physiology MedicalGenetics • The secondary palate forms from palatine shelves (maxillary promi
nence), which fuse in the midline, posterior to the incisive foramen.
• The primary and secondary palates fuse at the incisive foramen to form
the definitive hard palate.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Frontonasal prominence
Medial nasal prominence
Microbiology
Lateral nasal prominence Maxillary prominence
Maxillary prominence
Philtrum
Mandibular prominence
Primary Four incisor teeth
palate
Philtrum of lip
Intermaxillary segment
primary palate Incisive foramen
Secondary palate
Fused palatine shelves
(maxillary prominence)
(secondary palate)
Figure IFIigu6re 7. IIFac6e7. Faacned andPalatPealate DDeevveeloloppmmeenntt
21
CHAPTER 6 | HEAD AND NECk
CLINICAL CORRELATE CLINICAL CORRELATE
Robin sequence presents with a triad of
First arch syndrome results from abnormal formation of pharyngeal arch 1
poor mandibular growth, cleft palate, and a
because of faulty migration of neural crest cells, causing facial anomalies. Two
posteriorly placed tongue.
well described syndromes are Treacher Collins syndrome and Pierre Robin
sequence. Both defects involve neural crest cells.
Treacher Collins syndrome also presents
Pharyngeal fistula occurs when pouch 2 and groove 2 persist, thereby with mandibular hypoplasia, zygomatic
forming a fistula generally found along the anterior border of the muscle. hypoplasia, down slanted palpebral fissures,
colobomas, and malformed ears.
Pharyngeal cyst occurs when pharyngeal grooves that are normally
obliterated persist, forming a cyst usually located at the angle of the mandible.
Ectopic thyroid, parathyroid, or thymus results from abnormal migration CLINICAL CORRELATE
of these glands from their embryonic position to their adult anatomic
Cribriform plate fractures may result in
position. Ectopic thyroid tissue is found along the midline of the neck. Ectopic
dysosmia and rhinorrhea (CSF).
parathyroid or thymus tissue is generally found along the lateral aspect of the
neck. May be an important issue during neck surgery.
Thyroglossal duct cyst or fistula occurs when parts of the thyroglossal duct
persist, generally in the midline near the hyoid bone. The cyst may also be
found at the base of the tongue (lingual cyst).
DiGeorge sequence occurs when pharyngeal pouches 3 and 4 fail to
differentiate into the parathyroid glands and thymus. Neural crest cells are
involved.
CRANIUM
Cribriform plate (I)
Cranial Fossae
Optic canal (II and ophthalmic artery)
Superior orbital fissure (III, IV, VI, V1
Anterior
and ophthalmic veins)
Foramen rotundum (maxillary nerve/V2
Foramen ovale (mandibular nerve/V3 )
Middle Foramen spinosum (middle meningeal artery)
Foramen lacerum
Internal auditory meatus (VII and VIII)
Jugular foramen (IX, X, and XI)
Posterior
Hypoglossal canal (XII)
Foramen magnum (XI, spinal cord, vertebral arteries)
Figure II 6 8. Foramina: Cranial Fossae
Figure II 6 8. Foramina: Cranial Fossae
215
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Pharmacology Biochemistry Foramen magnum (XI, spinal cord,
vertebral arteries)
Stylomastoid foramen (VII)
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Jugular foramen (IX, X, XI)
Carotid canal (internal carotid artery,
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
carotid sympathetic nerve)
Foramen spinosum
(middle meningeal artery)
Microbiology
Foramen ovale (mandibular nerve)
Foramen lacerum
Figure II 6 9. Foramina: Base of Skull
Figure II 6 9. Foramina: Base of Skull
Supraorbital foramen (supraorbital VAN)
Optic canal (II and ophthalmic artery)
Superior orbital fissure (III, IV, VI, ophthalmic
nerve and veins)
Inferior orbital fissure
Infraorbital foramen (infraorbital VAN)
Mental foramen (mental VAN)
Figure II 6 10. Foramina: Front of Skull
Figure II 6 10. Foramina: Front of Skull
21
CHAPTER 6 | HEAD AND NECk
CRANIAL MENINGES AND DURAL VENOUS SINUSES CLINICAL CORRELATE
Jugular foramen syndrome may be caused
Cranial Meninges by a tumor pressing on CN IX, X, and XI.
Patients present with hoarseness, dysphagia
The brain is covered by 3 meninges that are continuous through the foramen
magnum with the spinal meninges. There are several similarities and differences (CN IX and X), loss of sensation over the
between spinal and cranial meninges. oropharynx and posterior third of the
tongue (CN IX), and trapezius and
• Pia mater tightly invests the surfaces of the brain and cannot be dissected
sternocleidomastoid weakness (CN XI). The
away, having the same relationship with the brain as spinal pia mater.
nearby CN XII may be involved, producing
• Dura mater (thickest) unlike the spinal dura, consists of 2 layers (perios
tongue deviation to the lesioned side.
teal and meningeal) that are fused together during most of their course in
the cranial cavity.
– Periosteal layer: outer layer lines the inner surfaces of the flat bones
and serves as their periosteum; can easily be peeled away from the
bones
– Meningeal (true dura) layer: innermost layer that is mostly fused with
the periosteal dura mater throughout the cranial cavity. At certain
points in the cranium, the meningeal layer separates from the perios
teal layer and forms the dural venous sinuses and connective tissue
foldings or duplications: falx cerebri, diaphragma sellae and tento
rium cerebelli. These duplications separate and support different parts
of the CNS.
• Arachnoid is the thin, delicate membrane which lines and follows the
inner surface of the meningeal dura. Projections of arachnoid called
arachnoid granulations penetrate through the dura mater and extend into
the superior sagittal dural venous sinus. Arachnoid granulations are where
CSF returns to the systemic venous circulation.
Deep vein
Arachnoid of scalp Emissary vein
granulations
Diploic vein Skin
Galea aponeurotica
Pericranium
Skull (diploic bone)
Superior sagittal Periosteal dura mater
sinus
Meningeal dura mater
Cranial
Falx cerebri
meninge
Arachnoid
Subarachnoid
space
Pia mater
Inferior sagittal
Bridging veins
sinus
Figure II 6Fig1u1re. CIIoro6nal11. CoronSaelctionSection of ofthethe DDuurraall SinSuisneusses
217
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
There are several spaces related to the cranial meninges:
• Epidural space is a potential space between the periosteal dura and the
bones of the skull: site of epidural hematomas (described later).
Pharmacology Biochemistry • Subdural space is the potential space between the meningeal dura and the
arachnoid membrane: site of subdural hematomas (described later).
• Subarachnoid space lies between the arachnoid and pia mater containing
CSF: site of subarachnoid hemorrhage (described later).
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Dural Venous Sinuses
Dural venous sinuses are formed at different points in the cranial cavity where the
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences periosteal and meningeal dural layers separate to form endothelial lined venous
channels called dural venous sinuses. The sinuses provide the major venous
drainage from most structures within the cranial cavity. They drain mostly into the
internal jugular vein, which exits the cranial floor at the jugular foramen. Most of
the dural venous sinuses are located in the 2 largest duplications of meningeal dura
Microbiology
mater (falx cerebri and the tentorium cerebelli).
The primary tributaries that flow into the sinuses are the following:
• Cerebral and cerebelli veins form bridging veins, which pass across the
subdural space to drain into the sinuses.
• Emissary veins are valveless channels that course through the bones of the
skull and allow dural sinuses to communicate with extracranial veins.
• Diploic veins drain the spongy (diploe) core of the flat bones.
• Arachnoid granulations are where CSF returns to the venous circulation.
• Meningeal veins drain the meninges.
1
A
Names of the Major Dural Sinuses 2
1. Superior sagittal* 6
Orbit (ophthalmic veins)
2. Inferior sagittal 3 7
B
3. Straight*
4
4. Transverse* (2) 6
4 Deep face veins
5. Sigmoid (2)
6. Cavernous (2) Confluence of sinuses
5 5
7. Superior petrosal (2)
* Drain into the confluence of sinuses
located at the inion.
Jugular foramen
Folds (Duplications) of Dura Mater
Internal jugular vein
A. Falx cerebri
B. Tentorium cerebelli
FigFuirgeure II 6 1II2. 6Dur1a2l. VeDnuoruasl SinVuesnesous Sinuse
218
CHAPTER 6 | HEAD AND NECk
Major dural venous sinuses
The major dural venous sinuses are the following:
• The superior sagittal sinus is located in the midsagittal plane along the
superior aspect of the falx cerebri. It drains primarily into the confluence
of the sinuses.
• The inferior sagittal sinus is located in the midsagittal plane near the
inferior margin of the falx cerebri. It terminates by joining with the great
cerebral vein (of Galen) to form the straight sinus at the junction of the
falx cerebri and tentorium cerebelli.
• The straight sinus is formed by the union of the inferior sagittal sinus and
the great cerebral vein. It usually terminates by draining into the conflu
ence of sinuses (or into the transverse sinus).
• The occipital sinus is a small sinus found in the posterior border of the
tentorium cerebelli. It drains into the confluence of sinuses.
• The confluence of sinuses is formed by the union of the superior sagittal,
straight, and occipital sinuses posteriorly at the occipital bone. It drains
laterally into the 2 transverse sinuses.
• The transverse sinuses are paired sinuses in the tentorium cerebelli and
attached to the occipital bone that drain venous blood from the confluence
of sinuses into the sigmoid sinuses.
• The sigmoid sinuses are paired and form a S shaped channel in the floor
of the posterior cranial fossa. The sigmoid sinus drains into the internal
jugular vein at the jugular foramen.
• The paired cavernous sinuses are located on either side of the body of the
sphenoid bone.
– Each sinus receives blood primarily from the orbit (ophthalmic veins)
and via emissary veins from the deep face (pterygoid venous plexus).
Superficial veins of the maxillary face drain into the medial angle of
the eye, enter the ophthalmic veins, and drain into the cavernous sinus.
– Each cavernous sinus drains via the superior and inferior petrosal
sinuses into the sigmoid sinus and internal jugular vein, respectively.
– The cavernous sinuses are the most clinically significant dural sinuses
because of their relationship to a number of cranial nerves. CN III and IV
and the ophthalmic and maxillary divisions of the trigeminal nerve are
located in lateral wall of the sinus. CN VI and internal carotid artery are
located centrally in the sinus.
21
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Cavernous sinus Optic chiasm
Oculomotor nerve (III)
Pharmacology Biochemistry Internal carotid artery
Trochlear nerve (IV)
Pituitary gland
Abducent nerve (VI)
Ophthalmic nerve (V1) Internal carotid artery
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Sphenoidal sinus
Maxillary nerve (V2)
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Nasopharynx
Microbiology Figure II 6 13. Coronal FigureSectioIIn 6 13. TChorrooungalh SectionPituitarTyhrough GPlaintuditary anGdland CaavnedrnouCsavernous SSiniunusesses
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Cavernous Sinus Thrombosis
Infection can spread from the superficial and deep face into the cavernous
sinus, producing a thrombosis that may result in swelling of sinus and damage
the cranial nerves that are related to the cavernous sinus.
CN III and IV and the ophthalmic and maxillary divisions of CN V will be
compressed in the lateral wall of the sinus.
CN VI and the internal carotid artery with its periarterial plexus of
postganglionic sympathetic fibers will be compressed in the central part of
the cavernous sinus. CN VI is typically affected first in a cavernous sinus
thrombosis with the other nerves being affected later. Initially, patients have an
internal strabismus (medially deviated eyeball) (CN VI lesion). Later, all eye
movements are affected, along with altered sensation in the skin of the upper
face and scalp.
INTRACRANIAL HEMORRHAGE
Epidural Hematoma
An epidural hematoma results from trauma to the lateral aspect of the skull
which lacerates the middle meningeal artery. Arterial hemorrhage occurs rapidly
in the epidural space between the periosteal dura and the skull.
• Epidural hemorrhage forms a lens shaped (biconvex) hematoma at the
lateral hemisphere.
• Epidural hematoma is associated with a momentary loss of consciousness
followed by a lucid (asymptomatic) period of up to 48 hours.
22
CHAPTER 6 | HEAD AND NECk
• Patients then develop symptoms of elevated intracranial pressure such as
headache, nausea, and vomiting, combined with neurological signs such as
hemiparesis.
• Herniation of the temporal lobe, coma, and death may occur rapidly if the
arterial blood is not evacuated.
Subdural Hematoma
A subdural hematoma results from head trauma that tears superficial (“bridging”)
cerebral veins at the point where they enter the superior sagittal sinus. A subdural
hemorrhage occurs between the meningeal dura and the arachnoid.
• Subdural hemorrhage forms a crescent shaped hematoma at the lateral
hemisphere.
• Large subdural hematoma results in signs of elevated intracranial pressure
such as headache and nausea.
• Small or chronic hematoma is often seen in elderly or chronic alcoholic
patients.
• Over time, herniation of the temporal lobe, coma, and death may result if
the venous blood is not evacuated.
Subarachnoid Hemorrhage
A subarachnoid hemorrhage results from a rupture of a berry aneurysm in the
circle of Willis. The most common site is in the anterior part of the circle of Willis
at the branch point of the anterior cerebral and anterior communicating arteries.
Other common sites are in the proximal part of the middle cerebral artery or at the
junction of the internal carotid and posterior communicating arteries. Typical
presentation is the onset of a severe headache.
ORBITAL MUSCLES AND THEIR INNERVATION
In the orbit, there are 6 extraocular muscles that move the eyeball. A seventh
muscle, the levator palpebrae superioris, elevates the upper eyelid.
• Four of the 6 extraocular muscles (the superior, inferior, and medial
rectus, and the inferior oblique, plus the levator palpebrae superioris) are
innervated by the oculomotor nerve (CN III).
• The superior oblique muscle is the only muscle innervated by the trochlear
nerve (CN IV).
• The lateral rectus is the only muscle innervated by the abducens nerve
(CN VI).
• The levator palpebrae superioris is composed of skeletal muscle innervated
by the oculomotor nerve (CN III) and smooth muscle (the superior tarsal
muscle) innervated by sympathetic fibers.
• Sympathetic fibers reach the orbit from a plexus on the internal carotid
artery of postganglionic axons that originate from cell bodies in the
superior cervical ganglion.
22
PART II | GROSS ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Right Eye
Trochlea
Superior oblique
(pulley) SR (III) IO (III)
Levator palpebrae superioris (cut)
Pharmacology Biochemistry
LR (VI) MR (III)
Superior rectus
IR (III) SO (IV)
Lateral rectus (cut)
Arrows show direction of eye
Physiology Common annular MetdeincdaolGnenetics
movement produced by each muscle.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Microbiology
Medial rectus
Optic nerve (II)
Inferior rectus
Inferior oblique
Figure II 6 15. Muscles of the Eye
Figure II 6 14. Muscles of the Eye
22
PART III
NEUROSCIENC

Nervous System Organization
1
and Development
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Explain information related to autonomic nervous system
❏ Use knowledge of general organization
NERVOUS SYSTEM
• The central nervous system (CNS) contains the brain and spinal cord,
which develop from the neural tube.
• The peripheral nervous system (PNS) contains cranial and spinal nerves,
which consist of neurons that give rise to axons, which grow out of the
neural tube, and neurons derived from neural crest cells. Skeletal motor
neurons and axons of preganglionic autonomic neurons are derived from
the neural tube.
– Neural crest cells form sensory neurons and postganglionic autonomic
neurons. The neuronal cell bodies of these neurons are found in
ganglia. Therefore, all ganglia found in the PNS contain either sensory
or postganglionic autonomic neurons and are derived from neural crest
cells.
– Chromaffin cells are neural crest cells, which migrate into the adrenal
medulla to form postganglionic sympathetic neurons.
Development of the Nervous System NOTE
Neurulation begins in the third week; both CNS and PNS derived from neuroec Alpha fetoprotein (AFP) levels may also be
toderm. The notochord induces the overlying ectoderm to form the neural plate elevated in gastroschisis and omphalocele.
(neuroectoderm). By end of the third week, neural folds grow over midline and AFP levels are low in pregnancy of Down
fuse to form neural tube.
syndrome fetus.
• During closure, neural crest cells also form from neuroectoderm.
• Neural tube 3 primary vesicles → 5 secondary vesicles → brain and spinal
cord
• Brain stem and spinal cord have an alar plate (sensory) and a basal plate
(motor); plates are separated by the sulcus limitans.
• Neural crest → sensory and postganglionic autonomic neurons, and other
non neuronal cell types.
• Peripheral NS (PNS): cranial nerves (12 pairs) and spinal nerves (31 pairs)
22
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Neural plate Neuroectoderm
Neural
groove
A
Pharmacology Biochemistry Ectoderm Neural fold
Mesoderm
A
Endoderm Notochord (induces formation
Physiology MedicalGenetics of the nervous system)
Notochordal
process Neural
groove
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences B Neural crest
Day 18 Somite
Microbiology Neural fold
Neural tube
Rostral neuropore
Neural crest
(closes at day 25)
C
Alar plate (sensory)
Failure to close results
in anencephaly, causing
B
polyhydramnios and
C increased alpha Basal plate (motor)
D fetoprotein and AChE
Neural crest
Caudal neuropore
(closes at 27D)
D
Failure to close
results in spina bifida
and increased alpha
Day 22
fetoprotein and AChE
Figure FiguIrIeI 1II1I. 1D1e.velDoepvmeelonptment of NoefrvouNservousSystem System
22
CHAPTER 1 | NERVOUS SYSTEM ORGANIZATION AND DEVELOPMENT
Central Nervous System
Adult Derivatives CLINICAL CORRELATE
5 secondary
CNS Ventricles
vesicles Axonal polyneuropathies produce distal
Cerebral Lateral “glove and stocking” weakness or sensory
Telencephalon
3 primary hemispheres ventricles deficits, and are related to axonal transport
vesicles
Third failure. Diabetes mellitus patients present
Diencephalon Thalamus
Forebrain ventricle with sensory neuropathies.
Cerebral
Midbrain Mesencephalon Midbrain
aqueduct
Hindbrain Pons and
Metencephalon
cerebellum Fourth
ventricle
Myelencephalon Medulla
Spinal cord
Central
Spinal cord
canal
Neural tube
Figure FiIgIIure1 2II.I 1Ad2u.ltAdult DeDrievraitvivateisves of SecoofndarySecondaryBrain VesiclesBrain Vesicles
Table III 1 1. Adult Derivatives of Secondary Brain Vesicles
Structures Neural Canal Remnant
Telencephalon Cerebral hemispheres, most of basal Lateral ventricles
ganglia
Diencephalon Thalamus, hypothalamus, subthalamus, Third ventricle
epithalamus (pineal gland), retina and
optic nerve
Mesencephalon Midbrain Cerebral aqueduct
Metencephalon Pons, cerebellum Fourth ventricle
Myelencephalon Medulla Central canal
Spinal cord
22
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Table III 1 2. Congenital Malformations of the Nervous System
Condition Types Description
Anencephaly — Failure of anterior neuropore to close
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Brain does not develop
Incompatible with life
Increased AFP during pregnancy and AChE
Spina bifida Spina bifida Failure to induce bone growth around the spinal cord
Physiology MedicalGenetics
occulta (Figure A)
Mildest form
Vertebrae fail to form around spinal cord
No increase in AFP
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Asymptomatic; tuft of hair over defect.
Spina bifida with Meninges protrude through vertebral defect
meningocele Increase in AFP
(Figure B)
Microbiology
Spina bifida with Meninges and spinal cord protrude through vertebral defect;
meningomyelocele seen with Arnold Chiari Type II
(Figure C) Increase in AFP
Spina bifida with Most severe
myeloschisis
Spinal cord can be seen externally
(Figure D)
Increase in AFP and AChE
A B C
Muscle Skin
Unfused laminae
bifida occulta:
Dura and arachnoid
nthe vertebral
symptomatic Subarachnoid space
Spinal cord
Vertebral body
Arnold Chiari Type I Most common
malformation
Mostly asymptomatic in children
Downward displacement of cerebellar tonsils through foramen magnum
Frequent association with syringomyelia
Type II More often symptomatic
Downward displacement of cerebellar vermis
Compression of IV ventricle → obstructive hydrocephaly
Frequent lumbar meningomyelocele
Dandy Walker Failure of foramina of Luschka and Magendie to open → dilation of IV
malformation
ventricle
Agenesis of cerebellar vermis and splenium of the corpus callosum
Hydrocephalus Most often caused by stenosis of cerebral aqueduct
CSF accumulates in ventricles and subarachnoid space
Increased head circumference
Holoprosencephaly Incomplete separation of cerebral hemispheres
One ventricle in telencephalon
Seen in trisomy 13 (Patau)
Abbreviation: AFP, alpha fetoprotein
228
CHAPTER 1 | NERVOUS SYSTEM ORGANIZATION AND DEVELOPMENT
Table III 1 3. Germ Layer Derivatives
Ectoderm Mesoderm Endoderm
Surface ectoderm Muscle Forms epithelial parts of:
Epidermis Smooth Tonsils
Hair Cardiac Thymus
Nails Skeletal Pharynx
Inner ear, external ear Connective tissue Larynx
Enamel of teeth All serous membranes Trachea
Lens of eye Bone and cartilage Bronchi
Anterior pituitary (Rathke’s pouch) Blood, lymph, cardio Lungs
vascular organs
Parotid gland Urinary bladder
Adrenal cortex
Neuroectoderm Urethra
Gonads and internal
Neural tube Tympanic cavity
reproductive organs
Central nervous system Auditory tube
Spleen
Retina and optic nerve GI tract
Kidney and ureter
Pineal gland
Dura mater
Neurohypophysis
Astrocytes
Oligodendrocytes (CNS myelin)
Ectoderm Mesoderm Endoderm
Neural crest Forms parenchyma of:
Adrenal medulla Liver
Ganglia Pancreas
Sensory (unipolar) Tonsils
Autonomic (postganglionic) Thyroid gland
Pigment cells (melanocytes) Parathyroid glands
Schwann cells (PNS myelin) Glands of the GI tract
Meninges Submandibular gland
Pia and arachnoid mater Sublingual gland
Pharyngeal arch cartilage (first
arch syndromes)
Odontoblasts
Aorticopulmonary septum (tetral
ogy of Fallot)
Endocardial cushions (Down
syndrome)
22
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
The autonomic nervous system (ANS) is responsible for the motor innervation of
smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, and glands of the body. It is divided into the
parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous systems. Both systems have 2 neurons
Pharmacology Biochemistry
in the peripheral distribution of the motor innervation: preganglionic neuron
with cell body in the CNS, and postganglionic neuron with cell body in a
ganglion in the PNS.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Central nervous
Ganglion
system (CNS)
Preganglionic Postganglionic
nerve fiber nerve fiber
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Target
Microbiology Figure III 1 3. Autonomic Nervous System
Figure III 1 3. Autonomic Nervous System
CNS
Postganglionic
Preganglionic neuron
various organs
PAN neuron
Craniosacral ACh NN ACh M heart, smooth
muscle, glands
SANS various organs
α
Thoracolumbar ACh NN NE or heart, smooth
β muscle, glands
sweat glands
ACh NN ACh M piloerector
NN: neuronal nicotinic receptor muscles
NM: muscle nicotinic receptor Neurohumoral
transmission α various organs
NE: norepinephrine ACh NN Epi or transported
β via blood
M: muscarinic receptor Adrenal medulla
ACh: acetylcholine SOMATIC
Motor neuron
ACh NM skeletal muscle
Neuromuscular
junction
Figure III 1 4. Autonomic and Somatic Nervous System Neurotransmitters/Receptors
Figure III 1 4. Autonomic and Somatic Nervous System
Neurotransmitters/Receptors
230
CHAPTER 1 | NERVOUS SYSTEM ORGANIZATION AND DEVELOPMENT
• Somatic nervous system: 1 neuron (from CNS → effector organ)
• ANS: 2 neurons (from CNS → effector organ)
– Preganglionic neuron: cell body in CNS
– Postganglionic neuron: cell body in ganglia in PNS
– Parasympathetic: long preganglionic, short postganglionic
– Sympathetic: short preganglionic, long postganglionic
(except adrenal medulla)
Parasympathetic Nervous System
Ciliary ganglion
Pupillary sphincter
III
Ciliary m.
Submandibular
VI Midbrain
Submandibular gland ganglion
IV
Sublingual gland V
VII Pons
Pterygopalatine
a
Lacrimal gland
ganglion
Nasal mucosa VIII
Oral mucosa IX
Medulla
Otic ganglion
Parotid gland X
XI
C1
Viscera of the
Terminal
thorax and abdomen
ganglia
(foregut and midgut)
CLINICAL CORRELATE
T1
Hirschsprung’s disease results from missing
terminal ganglia in the wall of the rectum.
Infants cannot pass meconium.
Preganglionic
Postganglionic
L1
Terminal
ganglia
Hindgut and
pelvic viscera
(including the bladder,
erectile tissue, S2
and rectum) S3
Pelvic S
splanchnic nerves
Figure III 1 5. Overview of Parasympathetic Outflow
Figure III 1 5. Overview of Parasympathetic Outflow
231
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Table III 1 4. Parasympathetic = Craniosacral Outflow
Origin Site of Synapse Innervation
Cranial nerves III, VII, IX Four cranial ganglia Glands and smooth muscle of the head
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Cranial nerve X Terminal ganglia (in or Viscera of the neck, thorax, foregut, and midgut
near the walls of viscera)
Pelvic splanchnic nerves Terminal ganglia (in or Hindgut and pelvic viscera (including bladder and
(S2, S3, S4) near the walls of viscera) erectile tissue)
Physiology MedicalGenetics
NOTE
Sympathetic Nervous System
Horner’s syndrome results in ipsilateral
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
ptosis, miosis, anhydrosis.
Horner’s Syndrome Lesion Sites
Hypothalamus
III
IV Head (sweat glands, dilator
Microbiology
V pupillae m., superior tarsal m.)
VI
VII
Internal carotid a.
VIII
IX External carotid a.
XI X
Descending
hypothalamic Superior cervical ganglion
fibers (drive all
preganglionic Middle cervical ganglion
sympathetic Vertebral ganglion
neurons)
Cervicothoracic ganglion
T1 Heart, trachea, bronchi,
lungs (Thorax)
Smooth muscle
and glands of the
foregut and midgut
Gray rami *
*Rejoin branches Prevertebral ganglia
*
of spinal nerve
* Thoracic splanchnic nerves
Prevertebral ganglia
L1 Smooth muscle and
glands of the hindgut
L2 and pelvic viscera
Lumbar splanchnic
nerves
Sympathetic
chain
Figure III 1 6. Overview of Sympathetic Outflow
Figure III 1 6. Overview of Sympathetic System
23
CHAPTER 1 | NERVOUS SYSTEM ORGANIZATION AND DEVELOPMENT
Table III 1 5. Sympathetic = Thoracolumbar Outflow NOTE
Origin Site of Synapse Innervation Gray rami are postganglionics that
rejoin spinal nerves to go to the
Spinal cord Sympathetic chain ganglia Smooth muscle and
body wall.
levels T1–L2 (paravertebral ganglia) glands of body wall and
limbs; head and thoracic
viscera
Thoracic Prevertebral ganglia Smooth muscle and
splanchnic (collateral; e.g., celiac, glands of the foregut and
nerves aorticorenal superior midgut
T5–T12 mesenteric ganglia)
Lumbar Prevertebral ganglia Smooth muscle and
splanchnic (collateral; e.g., inferior glands of the pelvic
nerves L1, L2 mesenteric and pelvic viscera and hindgut
ganglia)
Lateral horn
(T1–L2)
Dorsal ramus
Ventral ramus To smooth muscle
and glands of body
Spinal nerve wall and in limbs
White ramus
Gray ramus communicans communicans
(postganglionic) (preganglionic)
Sympathetic ganglion
Figure III 1Figu7r.e CroIsIsI 1 7.SeCctrioosns Sectioonf SpoinfalSpinalCordCord SShhoowwiinngg SympSaythmeptiacthetic Outflow Outflow
23

2
Histology of the Nervous System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Explain information related to neurons
❏ Solve problems concerning disorders of myelination
NEURONS
Neurons are cells which are morphologically and functionally polarized so that
information may pass from one end of the cell to the other. Neurons may be classified
by the form and number of their processes as bipolar, unipolar, or multipolar. The cell
body of the neuron contains the nucleus and membrane bound cytoplasmic organ
elles typical of a eukaryotic cell, including endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Golgi
apparatus, mitochondria, and lysosomes. The nucleus and nucleolus are prominent in
neurons.
The cytoplasm contains Nissl substance, clumps of rough ER with bound poly
somes. The cytoplasm also contains free polysomes; free and bound polysomes in
the Nissl substance are sites of protein synthesis.
23
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Multipolar Neuron
Pharmacology Biochemistry Dendrites
Physiology MedicalGenetics
MMiittoocchhoonnddrriiaa Cytoskeleton
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Nucleolus
PPeerikaryon (SOMA)
NNiissssll bbooddyy
Microbiology
Initial segment ent
ooff aaxxoonn
Golgi apparatus
NNooddee ooff RRanvier
SScchhwwaann cell
AAxxoonn
MMyelin sheath
FigureFigure IIIIII 22 11.. NNeeuuroronn StructuSrteructure
23
CHAPTER 2 | HISTOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. UCsoepdyrighwtith peMrmcGisrsaiown. Hill Companies. Used with permission.
Figure III 2 2. Neural Tissue with Nissl stain that stains rough ER in CLINICAL CORRELATE
Figure III 2 2. Neural Tissue with Nissl stain that stains rough
cell body (arrowhead) and proximal parts of dendrites (B)
ER in cell body (arrowhead) and proximal parts of dendrites (B) CNS Disease and Cytoplasmic Inclusions
The axon (A) lacks Nissl substance. The nucleus of an adjacent in Neurons
The axon (A) lacks Nissl substance. The nucleus of an
neuron has a prominent nucleolus (arrow).
adjacent neuron has a prominent nucleolus (arrow).
Lewy bodies are cytoplasmic inclusions of
degenerating neurons of the substantia
nigra, pars compacta, evident in Parkinson’s
Cytoskeleton
disease and in cortical and brain stem
The cytoskeleton of the neuron consists of neurofilaments, microfilaments, and
neurons seen in certain forms of dementia.
microtubules.
Negri bodies are eosinophilic cytoplasmic
• Neurofilaments provide structural support for the neuron, and are most
numerous in the axon and the proximal parts of dendrites. inclusions seen in degenerating neurons in
the hippocampus and cerebellar cortex in
• Microfilaments form a matrix near the periphery of the neuron. A
patients with rabies.
microfilament matrix is prominent in growth cones of neuronal processes
and functions to aid in the motility of growth cones during development.
A microfilament matrix is also prominent in dendrites and forms struc
tural specializations at synaptic membranes.
• Microtubules are found in all parts of the neuron, and are the cytoplasmic
organelles used in axonal transport.
23
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Microbiology Copyright McGraw HillCompaCnioepsy.rightUsedMcwGitrhawpermissHioilnl. Companies. Used with permission.
FigurFeigureIII 2II3I. E2M3.ofENMeuropiolf Neuinroclpuidling inCcelluldingBody ofthae NeCuerloln Bowdiyth Roofugha ER
Neuron with Rough(arrowheaEdRs) (arrowahnedads)Golgi (arrowasn)d Golgi (arrows)
Surrounding neuropil has myelinated axons(M)
Surrounding neuropil has myelinated axons(M)
and unmyelinated bare axons (box).
and unmyelinated bare axons (box).
CLINICAL CORRELATE Dendrites taper from the cell body and provide the major surface for synaptic
contacts with axons of other neurons. Dendrites may contain spines, which are
In degenerative neuronal diseases of the
small cytoplasmic extensions that dramatically increase the surface area of
CNS, a tau protein becomes excessively
dendrites. Dendrites may be highly branched; the branching pattern of dendrites
phosphorylated, which prevents crosslinking may be used to define a particular neuronal cell type.
of microtubules. The affected microtubules
The axon has a uniform diameter and may branch at right angles into
form helical filaments and neurofibrillary
collaterals along the length of the axon, in particular near its distal end. The
tangles and senile plaques in the cell body
proximal part of the axon is usually marked by an axon hillock, a tapered exten
and dendrites of neurons. Neurofibrillary
sion of the cell body that lacks Nissl substance.
tangles are prominent features of
The initial segment is adjacent to the axon hillock. The membrane of the initial
degenerating neurons in Alzheimer’s disease,
segment contains numerous voltage sensitive sodium ion channels. The initial
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and Down
segment is the “trigger zone” of an axon where conduction of electrical activity as
syndrome.
an action potential is initiated.
If the axon is myelinated, the myelin sheath begins at the initial segment. The
cytoplasm of the entire axon lacks free polysomes, Nissl substance, and Golgi
apparatus but contains mitochondria and smooth ER.
Anterograde axonal transport moves proteins and membranes that are synthe
sized in the cell body through the axon to the synaptic terminal. In fast antero
grade transport, there is a rapid (100–400 mm/day) movement of materials from
the cell body to the axon terminal.
• Fast anterograde transport is dependent on kinesin, which acts as the
motor molecule. Fast anterograde transport delivers precursors of peptide
neurotransmitters to synaptic terminals.
23
CHAPTER 2 | HISTOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
• In slow anterograde transport, there is a slow (1–2 mm/day) anterograde
movement of soluble cytoplasmic components. Cytoskeletal proteins,
enzymes, and precursors of small molecule neurotransmitters are trans
ported to synaptic terminals by slow anterograde transport. Slow transport
is not dependent on microtubules or ATPase motor molecules.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Neuropathies and Axonal Transport
• Disruption of fast anterograde transport may result in an axonal
polyneuropathy. The cause may be anoxia (which affects mitochondrial
oxidative phosphorylation) or anticancer agents e.g., colchicine and
vinblastine (which depolymerize microtubules).
• In patients with diabetes, hyperglycemia results in an alteration of proteins
that form microtubules, which may disrupt axonal transport. Patients may
develop axonal polyneuropathies in long axons in nerves, producing a
“glove and stocking” pattern of altered sensation and pain in the feet and
then in the hands.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
The polio, herpes, and rabies viruses and
Retrograde axonal transport returns intracellular material from the synaptic
terminal to the cell body to be recycled or digested by lysosomes. tetanus toxins are taken up and
retrogradely transported by axons that
Retrograde transport uses microtubules and is slower than anterograde transport
innervate skeletal muscle.
(60–100 mm/day). It is dependent on dynein, an ATPase, which acts as the
retrograde motor molecule. Retrograde transport also permits communication Herpes is taken up and retrogradely
between the synaptic terminal and the cell body by transporting trophic factors transported in sensory fibers and remains
emanating from the postsynaptic target or in the extracellular space.
dormant in sensory ganglia
Glial and Supporting Cells in the CNS and PNS
The supporting (or glial) cells of the CNS are small cells that differ from neurons.
Supporting cells have only one kind of process and do not form chemical synapses.
Unlike neurons, they readily divide and proliferate; glioma is the most common
type of primary tumor of the CNS.
Astrocytes are the most numerous glial cells in the CNS, and they have large
numbers of radiating processes.
• They provide the structural support or scaffolding for the CNS and
contain large bundles of intermediate filaments that consist of glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP).
• They have uptake systems which remove the neurotransmitter glutamate
and K+ ions from the extracellular space.
• They have foot processes which contribute to the blood–brain barrier by
forming a glial limiting membrane.
• They hypertrophy and proliferate after an injury to the CNS, filling up the
extracellular space left by degenerating neurons by forming an astroglial
scar. Also contributing to the blood brain barrier are the pericytes that
surround the capillaries in the brain.
239
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Radial glia are precursors of astrocytes that guide neuroblast migration during
CNS development.
Microglia cells are the smallest glial cells in the CNS. Unlike the rest of the CNS
Pharmacology Biochemistry neurons and glia, which are derived from neuroectoderm, microglia are derived
from bone marrow monocytes and enter the CNS after birth.
• They provide a link between cells of the CNS and the immune system.
• They proliferate and migrate to the site of a CNS injury and phagocytose
Physiology MedicalGenetics
neuronal debris after injury.
• They determine the chances of survival of a CNS tissue graft, and are the
cells in the CNS that are targeted by the HIV 1 virus in those with AIDS.
The affected microglia may produce cytokines that are toxic to neurons.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
CNS microglia that become phagocytic in response to neuronal tissue damage may
secrete toxic free radicals. Accumulation of free radicals, such as superoxide, may
lead to disruption of the calcium homeostasis of neurons.
Microbiology Oligodendrocytes form myelin for axons in the CNS. Each of the processes of the
oligodendrocyte can myelinate individual segments of many axons. Unmyelinated
axons in the CNS are not ensheathed by oligodendrocyte cytoplasm.
Schwann cells are the supporting cells of the peripheral nervous system (PNS),
and are derived from neural crest cells. Schwann cells form the myelin for axons
and processes in the PNS. Each Schwann cell forms myelin for only a single
internodal segment of a single axon. Unmyelinated axons in the PNS are envel
oped by the cytoplasmic processes of a Schwann cell. Schwann cells act as phago
cytes and remove neuronal debris in the PNS after injury. A node of Ranvier is the
region between adjacent myelinated segments of axons in the CNS and the PNS.
In all myelinated axons, nodes of Ranvier are sites that permit action potentials to
jump from node to node (saltatory conduction). Saltatory conduction dramatically
increases the conduction velocity of impulses in myelinated axons.
DISORDERS OF MYELINATION
Demyelinating diseases are acquired conditions involving selective damage to
myelin. Other diseases (e.g., infectious, metabolic, inherited) can also affect myelin
and are generally called leukodystrophies.
24
CHAPTER 2 | HISTOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
Table III 2 1. Conditions of Impaired Myelination
Disease Symptoms Notes
Multiple sclerosis (MS) Symptoms separated in space and Occurs 2x more often in women
time
Onset often in decades 3 or 4
Vision loss (optic neuritis)
Higher prevalence in temperate zones
Internuclear ophthalmoplegia
Relapsing–remitting course is most common
(medial longitudinal fasciculus)
Well circumscribed demyelinated plaques often
Motor and sensory deficits
in periventricular areas
Vertigo
Chronic inflammation; axons initially preserved
Neuropsychiatric
Increased IgG (oligoclonal bands) in CSF
Treatment: high dose steroids, interferon beta,
glatiramer
Guillain Barré syndrome Acute symmetric ascending Onset often preceded 1–3 weeks by
inflammatory neuropathy of PNS respiratory or GI illness
myelin
Elevated CSF protein with normal cell count
Weakness begins in lower limbs (albuminocytologic dissociation)
and ascends; respiratory failure
can occur in severe cases
Autonomic dysfunction may be
prominent
Cranial nerve involvement is
common
Sensory loss, pain, and
paresthesias rarely occur
Reflexes invariably decreased or
absent
Copyright McGraw Hill Companies. Used withMpceGrmraiwssion.CoHpyilrlightCompanies. Used with permission.
Figure III 2 4. Section of a Peripheral Nerve
Figure III 2 4. ⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑ ⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑ ⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑
⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑ ⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑ ⯑⯑ ⯑⯑ ⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑ ⯑⯑⯑⯑ ⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑
Note endoneurial border of an individual axon
⯑⯑⯑ ⯑⯑⯑ ⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑ ⯑⯑⯑⯑ ⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑ ⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑ ⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑
(arrowhead) and 2 Schwann cell nuclei (arrows)
⯑
24
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Myelin
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Schwann
cell nuclei
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Microbiology
From the IMC,Fr©om2010the DIxMRC,Dev®elop2m01en0t DxRGroDuepv,elopmInecn.t All righGtrsoup,reservIendc.. All rights reserved.
Figure III 2 5. Axons Cut in Cross Section
Figure III 2 5. ⯑⯑⯑n⯑ ⯑u⯑ in ⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑Sec⯑i⯑n
Ependymal cells line the ventricles in the adult brain. Some ependymal cells
differentiate into choroid epithelial cells, forming part of the choroid plexus, which
produces cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Ependymal cells are ciliated; ciliary action
helps circulate CSF.
Tanycytes are specialized ependymal cells that have basal cytoplasmic processes in
contact with blood vessels; these processes may transport substances between a
blood vessel and a ventricle.
Blood–Brain Barrier
The blood–brain barrier restricts access of micro organisms, proteins, cells, and
drugs to the nervous system. It consists of capillary endothelial cells, an underlying
basal lamina, astrocytes, and pericytes.
• The most important elements of the blood brain barrier are the cerebral
CLINICAL CORRELATE capillary endothelial cells and their intercellular tight junctions.
Drugs of addiction—heroin, ethanol, and • Astrocytes and pericytes are found at the blood–brain barrier outside the
nicotine—are lipid soluble compounds that basal lamina. Astrocytes have processes with “end feet” that cover >95% of
the basal lamina adjacent to the capillary endothelial cells.
readily diffuse across the blood–brain
barrier.
Substances cross the blood–brain barrier into the CNS by diffusion, by selective
transport, and via ion channels. Oxygen and carbon dioxide are lipid soluble
gases that readily diffuse across the blood–brain barrier. Glucose, amino acids, and
vitamins K and D are selectively transported across the blood–brain barrier.
Sodium and potassium ions move across the blood–brain barrier through ion
channels.
24
CHAPTER 2 | HISTOLOGY OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
Chromatolysis (dispersion of
Nissl substance and swelling
of the neuron cell body)
Anterograde
Retrograde
(Wallerian)
degeneration Site of
degeneration
injury
Schwann
cell
Distal
Proximal stump
stump Degenerating
nerve terminal
A
Schwann cells guide
the growth of the
regenerating axon;
Aberrant axonal
regeneration rate
sprouts degenerate
1–3 mm per day
Node of
Ranvier Axonal sprout
Distal axon and terminals
B completely degenerate
Figure III 2 6F.iguNreeuronIII 2 6.UnNdeerugrooinng UndergoingAxotomAy,xotomy, CChhrroommaattoollyyssiiss,, and ReganenderationRegeneratioinn the PNS in the PNS
24
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Response of Axons to Destructive Lesions (Severing an Axon or
Axotomy) or Irritative Lesions (Compression of an Axon)
Anterograde or Wallerian degeneration distal to the cut occurs when an axon is
Pharmacology Biochemistry severed in either the CNS or PNS. The closer the destructive lesion is to the
neuronal cell body, the more likely the neuron is to die. In the PNS, anterograde
degeneration of axons is rapid and complete after several weeks. In the PNS, the
endoneurial Schwann cell sheath that envelops a degenerating axon does not
degenerate and provides a scaffold for regeneration and remyelination of the axon.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
CLINICAL CORRELATE Neurons with severed axons in the PNS are capable of complete axonal regenera
tion. Successful sprouts from the cut axon grow into and through endoneurial
Schwannomas typically affect VIII nerve
sheaths and are guided by Schwann cells back to their targets. Regeneration
fibers seen in neurofibromatosis type 2.
proceeds at the rate of 1–2 mm/day, which corresponds to the rate of slow antero
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
grade transport.
Half of brain and spinal cord tumors are metastatic.
Microbiology
Table III 2 2. Primary Tumors
Tumor Features Pathology
Schwannoma • Third most common primary brain • Antoni A (hypercellular) and B (hypocellular)
tumor areas
• Most frequent location: CN VIII at • Bilateral acoustic schwannomas—pathog
cerebellopontine angle nomonic for neurofibromatosis type 2
• Hearing loss, tinnitus, CN V +
VII signs
• Good prognosis after surgical
resection
Craniopharyngioma • Derived from oral epithelium • Histology resembles ameloblastoma (most
(remnants of Rathke pouch) common tumor of tooth)
• Usually children and young adults
• Often calcified
• Symptoms due to encroachment on
pituitary stalk or optic chiasm
• Benign but may recur
24
3
Ventricular System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Demonstrate understanding of ventricular system and venous drainage
❏ Explain information related to CSF distribution, secretion, and
circulation
The brain and spinal cord float within a protective bath of cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF), which is produced continuously by the choroid plexus within the ventricles
of the brain.
Each part of the CNS contains a component of the ventricular system. There are 4 NOTE
interconnected ventricles in the brain: 2 lateral ventricles, a third ventricle, and a Choroid plexus secretes CSF into all
fourth ventricle.
ventricles. Arachnoid granulations are sites
• A lateral ventricle is located deep within each cerebral hemisphere. Each of CSF resorption.
lateral ventricle communicates with the third ventricle via an interven
tricular foramen (foramen of Monro).
• The third ventricle is found in the midline within the diencephalon and
communicates with the fourth ventricle via the cerebral aqueduct (of
Sylvius), which passes through the midbrain.
• The fourth ventricle is located between the dorsal surfaces of the pons and
upper medulla and the ventral surface of the cerebellum. The fourth
ventricle is continuous with the central canal of the lower medulla and
spinal cord.
VENTRICULAR SYSTEM AND VENOUS DRAINAGE
The brain and spinal cord float within a protective bath of CSF, which is produced
by the lining of the ventricles, the choroid plexus. CSF circulation begins in the
ventricles and then enters the subarachnoid space to surround the brain and spinal
cord.
24
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Third ventricle
Foramen of Monro Body of lateral
Pharmacology Biochemistry
ventricle
Anterior horn
of the lateral Posterior horn of lateral
ventricle ventricle (occipital)
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Inferior horn of lateral
ventricle (temporal)
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialScienceCserebral aqueduct
(of Sylvius) Fourth ventricle
Central canal
Microbiology
Figure III 3 1. Ventricles and CSF Circulation
Figure III 3 1. Ventricles and CSF Circulation
Superior
NOTE Arachnoid sagittal sinus
granulation
Atotal of 400–500 cc of CSF (CSF return)
is produced per day; ventricles
Lateral
and subarachnoid space contain
Choroid ventricle
90–150 cc, so all of CSF is turned plexus
over 2–3 times per day.
Interventricular
foramen of Monro
Third ventricle
Cerebral aqueduct
Foramen of Luschka
(lateral aperture)
Foramen
Fourth ventricle
of Magendie
(median aperture)
Subarachnoid space
FigureFigure IIIIII332.2. SSaaggiittttaall SecStieocntion of theof Bthraein Brain
interventricular foramen of Monro cerebral aqueduct
Lateral ventricles → third ventricle → fourth ventricle → subarachnoid space
(via foramina of Luschka and foramen of Magendie)
24
CHAPTER 3 | VENTRICULAR SYSTEM
CSF Production and Barriers
Choroid plexus—contains choroid epithelial cells and is in the lateral, third, and
fourth ventricles. Secretes CSF. Tight junctions form blood CSF barrier.
Blood brain barrier—formed by capillary endothelium with tight junctions;
astrocyte foot processes contribute.
Once CSF is in the subarachnoid space, it goes up over convexity of the brain and
enters the venous circulation by passing through arachnoid granulations into
dural venous sinuses.
Deep vein
Arachnoid of scalp Emissary vein
granulations
Diploic vein
Skin
Galea aponeurotica
Pericranium
Skull (diploic bone)
Dura mater
Cranial
Arachnoid mater
meninges
Pia mater
Superior sagittal sinus
Falx cerebri
Subarachnoid space
Inferior sagittal sinus
FigureFigure IIIIII 33 33.. CCoororonnaall SectionSectionof the DoufraltheSinusDesural Sinuses
Sinuses
Superior sagittal sinus (in superior margin of falx cerebri)—drains into
2 transverse sinuses. Each of these drains blood from the confluence of sinuses
into sigmoid sinuses. Each sigmoid sinus exits the skull (via jugular foramen) as
the internal jugular veins.
Inferior sagittal sinus (in inferior margin of falx cerebri)—terminates by joining
with the great cerebral vein of Galen to form the straight sinus at the falx cerebri
and tentorium cerebelli junction. This drains into the confluence of sinuses.
Cavernous sinus—a plexus of veins on either side of the sella turcica. Surrounds
internal carotid artery and cranial nerves III, IV, V, and VI. It drains into the
transverse sinus (via the superior petrosal sinus) and the internal jugular vein
(via the inferior petrosal sinus).
24
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Superior
sagittal sinus
Falx cerebri Inferior
sagittal sinus
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Tentorium cerebelli Cavernous
sinus
Sigmoid sinus
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Superior petrosal sinus
Pathology BehavSitoraraiglShctience/SociaslinSucsiences
Transverse sinus
Microbiology
Tentorium cerebelli
Occipital sinus
Figure FIiIgIure3 4I.II D3ur4a.l DuralVenoVuesnous SiSniunsuesses
Hydrocephalus
Excess volume or pressure of CSF, leading to dilated ventricles
Table III 3 1. Types and Features of Hydrocephalus
Type of Hydrocephalus Description
Noncommunicating Obstruction of flow within ventricles; most commonly occurs at narrow points,
e.g., foramen of Monro, cerebral aqueduct and/or openings of fourth ventricle
Communicating Impaired CSF reabsorption in arachnoid granulations or obstruction of flow in
subarachnoid space
Normal pressure (chronic) CSF is not absorbed by arachnoid villi (a form of communicating hydrocephalus).
CSF pressure is usually normal. Ventricles chronically dilated. Produces triad of
dementia, apraxic (magnetic) gait, and urinary incontinence. Peritoneal shunt.
24
CHAPTER 3 | VENTRICULAR SYSTEM
CSF DISTRIBUTION, SECRETION, AND CIRCULATION
CSF fills the subarachnoid space and the ventricles of the brain. The average adult
has 90–150 mL of total CSF, although 400–500 mL is produced daily. Only 25 mL
of CSF is found in the ventricles themselves.
Approximately 70% of the CSF is secreted by the choroid plexus, which consists of CLINICAL CORRELATE
glomerular tufts of capillaries covered by ependymal cells that project into the The concentration of protein (including all
ventricles (the remaining 30% represents metabolic water production). The
immunoglobulins) is much lower in the CSF
choroid plexus is located in parts of each lateral ventricle, the third ventricle, and
as compared with serum.
the fourth ventricle.
Normal CSF contains 0–4 lymphocytes or
CSF from the lateral ventricles passes through the interventricular foramina of
mononuclear cells per cubic millimeter.
Monro into the third ventricle. From there, CSF flows through the aqueduct of
Sylvius into the fourth ventricle. The only sites where CSF can leave the ventricles Although the presence of a few monocytes or
and enter the subarachnoid space outside the CNS are through 3 openings in the lymphocytes is normal, the presence of
fourth ventricle, 2 lateral foramina of Luschka and the median foramen of Ma polymorphonuclear leukocytes is always
gendie.
abnormal, as in bacterial meningitis.
Within the subarachnoid space, CSF also flows up over the convexity of the brain • Red blood cells are not normally found
and around the spinal cord. Almost all CSF returns to the venous system by
in the CSF but may be present after
draining through arachnoid granulations into the superior sagittal dural venous
traumatic spinal tap or subarachnoid
sinus.
hemorrhage.
• Normal CSF is a clear fluid, isotonic with serum (290–295 mOsm/L).
• Increased protein levels may indicate
• The pH of CSF is 7.33 (arterial blood pH, 7.40; venous blood pH, 7.36).
a CNS tumor.
• Sodium ion (Na+) concentration is equal in serum and CSF
• Tumor cells may be present in the CSF
(≈138 mEq/L).
in cases with meningeal involvement.
• CSF has a higher concentration of chloride (Cl−) and magnesium (Mg2+)
ions than does serum.
• CSF has a lower concentration of potassium (K+), calcium (Ca2+), and
bicarbonate (HCO3 −) ions, as well as glucose, than does serum.
The blood–CSF barrier is a mechanism which protects the chemical integrity of
the brain. Tight junctions located along the epithelial cells of the choroid plexus
form the blood–CSF barrier. Transport systems are similar but not identical to the
those of blood–brain barrier. The ability of a substance (drug) to enter the CSF
does not guarantee it will gain access to the brain.
24

4
The Spinal Cord
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Solve problems concerning general features
❏ Interpret scenarios on neural systems
GENERAL FEATURES
The spinal cord is housed in the vertebral canal. It is continuous with the medulla
below the pyramidal decussation and terminates as the conus medullaris at the
second lumbar vertebra of the adult. The roots of 31 pairs of spinal nerves arise
segmentally from the spinal cord.
There are 8 cervical pairs of spinal nerves (C1 through C8). The cervical
enlargement (C5 through T1) gives rise to the rootlets that form the brachial
plexus, which innervates the upper limbs.
There are 12 thoracic pairs of spinal nerves (T1 through T12). Spinal nerves
emanating from thoracic levels innervate most of the trunk.
There are 5 lumbar pairs of spinal nerves (L1 through L5). The lumbar enlarge
ment (L2 through S3) gives rise to rootlets that form the lumbar and sacral
plexuses, which innervate the lower limbs.
There are 5 sacral pairs of spinal nerves (S1 through S5). Spinal nerves at the
sacral level innervate part of the lower limbs and the pelvis.
There is 1 coccygeal pair of spinal nerves. The cauda equina consists of the dorsal
and ventral roots of the lumbar, sacral, and coccygeal spinal nerves.
Inside the spinal cord, gray matter is centrally located and shaped like a butterfly. It
contains neuronal cell bodies, their dendrites, and the proximal parts of axons.
White matter surrounds the gray matter on all sides. White matter contains
bundles of functionally similar axons called tracts or fasciculi, which ascend or
descend in the spinal cord.
25
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Supplies:
• Skin of back and
White matter: tracts and fasciculi
dorsal neck
Microbiology Dorsal ramus • Deep intrinsic back
(mixed) muscles (Erector
Arachnoid spinae)
Dura mater
White matter
Gray matter Pia mater
Dorsal root
(sensory) Dorsal root
ganglion
Gray matter Ventral root (motor)
Spinal nerve Supplies:
Gray matter:
Ventral ramus • Skin of anterolateral
Dorsal horn (sensory) (mixed) trunk and limbs
Ventral horn (motor) • Skeletal muscles of
Intermediate zone (autonomic anterolateral trunk and
neurons T1 -L2 S2 -S4 ) Sympathetic limbs
Clarke’s nucleus (T1 -L2 ) ganglion
Figure III 4Figu1r.e CrIoIsIs4 1. SCercotisosn Sectionof SofpinSalpinal CCoorrdd andandPartsPartosf Spinalof SNpeirnvael Nerve
25
CHAPTER 4 | THE SPINAL CORD
Table III 4 1. General Spinal Cord Features
Conus medullaris Caudal end of the spinal cord (S3–S5) (in adults, ends at the
L2 vertebra)
Cauda equina Nerve roots of the lumbar, sacral, and coccygeal spinal
nerves
Filum terminale Slender pial extension that tethers the spinal cord to the
bottom of the vertebral column
Doral root ganglia Cell bodies of primary sensory neurons
Dorsal and ventral roots Each segment has a pair
Dorsal horn Sensory neurons
Ventral horn Motor neurons
Spinal nerve Formed from dorsal and ventral roots (mixed nerve)
Cervical enlargement (C5–T1) → branchial plexus → upper limbs
Lumbar enlargement (L2–S3) → lumbar and sacral plexuses → lower limbs
Posterior funiculus
Posterior (dorsal) gray horn
Posterior median sulcus
Lateral funiculus
Posterior intermediate sulcus
Anterior (ventral)
gray horn
Dorsal root entry zone
Anterior funiculus
Intermediate (lateral) gray horn
Dorsal
Root filaments
Ventral
Dorsal root ganglion
Anterior median fissure
Anterolateral sulcus Spinal nerve
FigureFigureIII 4 2.IIIGene4ral2. SGpeinnaelral Cord SFpeiantaulres Cord Features
25
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Dorsal Horn
The dorsal horn is dominated by neurons that respond to sensory stimulation. All
incoming sensory fibers in spinal nerves enter the dorsolateral part of the cord
adjacent to the dorsal horn in a dorsal root. Neurons in the dorsal horn project to
Pharmacology Biochemistry
higher levels of the CNS to carry sensations to the brain stem, cerebral cortex, or
cerebellum. Other dorsal horn neurons participate in reflexes.
Physiology MedicalGenetics Dorsal root ganglion cell
Dorsal horn: rexed laminae I–VI
Medial division
Ventral horn: rexed laminae VIII–IX Proprioception
(Ia, Ib fibers) Collaterals enter
Intermediate zone: lamina VII dorsal columns
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Touch (II, A beta fibers)
Lateral division
I
Sharp pain,
cold (III, A delta fibers)
II
III
Microbiology Dull pain,
warmth (IV, C fiber)
IV
Contribute
V
to reflexes
VII
IX
X
VIII
IX VIII
IX
IX
FigureFigure IIIIII4 43.3. DDorosraslal RoRootsots and anSdites SoitfesTerminaotfionTerminatiinonthe
in the SSppiinnaall CordCordGray GMrayatter Matter
Ventral Horn
The ventral horn contains alpha and gamma motoneurons.
• The alpha motoneurons innervate skeletal muscle (extrafusal fibers) by
way of a specialized synapse at a neuromuscular junction.
• The gamma motoneurons innervate the contractile intrafusal muscle
fibers of the muscle spindle.
• Within the ventral horn, alpha and gamma motoneurons that innervate
flexors are dorsal to those that innervate extensors. Alpha and gamma
motoneurons that innervate the proximal musculature are medial to those
that innervate the distal musculature.
• Axons of alpha and gamma motoneurons and axons of preganglionic auto
nomic neurons leave the cord by way of a ventral root.
25
CHAPTER 4 | THE SPINAL CORD
Corticospinal tract
NOTE
C5–T1 and L2–S3 have
large ventral horn.
F L E FOR X EA O S R H M OU R LDE S R
HAND ARM TRUN NOTE
Alpha motor neurons make
E X T E N S O R skeletal muscles contract.
S
Gamma motor neurons
make muscle spindles more
sensitive to stretch.
Topographic organization
of alpha and gamma Alpha and gamma
motor neurons in cervical cord motor axons from
lamina IX in ventral root
Renshaw cells
Figure III 4 4. Topographic Organization of Alpha and Gamma
Motoneurons (LMNs) in Lamina IX
Intermediate Zone
The intermediate zone of the spinal cord from T1 to L2 contains preganglionic
sympathetic neuron cell bodies and Clarke nucleus, which send unconscious
proprioception to the cerebellum.
NEURAL SYSTEMS
There are 3 major neural systems in the spinal cord that use neurons in the gray
matter and tracts or fasciculi of axons in the white matter. These neural systems
have components which can be found at all levels of the CNS, from the cerebral
cortex to the tip of the spinal cord. A knowledge of these 3 neural systems is
essential for understanding the effects of lesions in the spinal cord and brain stem,
and at higher levels of the CNS.
NOTE
Motor System
Upper motoneuron
Voluntary innervation of skeletal muscle
Lower motoneuron
Upper and Lower Motoneurons
Two motoneurons, an upper motoneuron and a lower motoneuron, together
Motor end plate of skeletal muscles
form the basic neural circuit involved in the voluntary contraction of skeletal
muscle everywhere in the body. The lower motoneurons are found in the
ventral horn of the spinal cord and in cranial nerve nuclei in the brain stem.
255
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Axons of lower motoneurons of spinal nerves exit in a ventral root, then
join the spinal nerve to course in one of its branches to reach and synapse
directly at a neuromuscular junction in skeletal muscle. Axons of lower moto
neurons in the brain stem exit in a cranial nerve.
Pharmacology Biochemistry
To initiate a voluntary contraction of skeletal muscle, a lower motoneuron must be
innervated by an upper motoneuron. The cell bodies of upper motoneurons are
found in the brain stem and cerebral cortex, and their axons descend into the
spinal cord in a tract to reach and synapse on lower motoneurons, or on interneu
Physiology MedicalGenetics
rons, which then synapse on lower motoneurons. At a minimum, therefore, to
initiate a voluntary contraction of skeletal muscle, 2 motoneurons, an upper and a
lower, must be involved. The upper motoneuron innervates the lower motoneuron,
and the lower motoneuron innervates the skeletal muscle.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
The cell bodies of upper motoneurons are found in the red nucleus, reticular
formation, and lateral vestibular nuclei of the brain stem, but the most important
location of upper motoneurons is in the cerebral cortex. Axons of these cortical
neurons course in the corticospinal tract.
Microbiology
NOTE
Right Left
UMNs have net inhibitory effect on muscle
stretch reflexes.
Upper motor Cerebral Frontal lobe
neuron (UMN) cortex Brodmann
Areas 4&6
NOTE Precentral
gyrus (primary motor cortex)
Voluntary contraction: UMN → LMN
Reflect contraction: muscle sensory Caudal
neuron → LMN medulla spinal cord Brain
junction stem
Pyramidal
decussation
Spinal
Lateral
cord
corticospinal
tract
Muscle spindle (Ia)
afferent from
Function: voluntary muscle spindle
refined movements of
Muscle stretch reflex
the distal extremities
Muscle
Lower motor
spindle
neuron (LMN)
(Alpha) Skeletal
muscle
Figure IIIFigu4re5. IIVIolu4ntar5y. VoluntaryContraCctoinotnraction ooff SSkkeeleletatall MuscMleu:scle:UMN aUndMNLMNasnd LMNs
25
CHAPTER 4 | THE SPINAL CORD
Corticospinal Tract CLINICAL CORRELATE
The primary motor cortex, located in the precentral gyrus of the frontal lobe, and Lesions of the Corticospinal Tract
the premotor area, located immediately anterior to the primary motor cortex, give
rise to about 60% of the fibers of the corticospinal tract (Figure III 4 4). Primary The crossing or decussation of axons of the
and secondary somatosensory cortical areas located in the parietal lobe give rise to corticospinal tract at the medulla/spinal
about 40% of the fibers of the corticospinal tract. cord junction has significant clinical
implications.
Fibers in the corticospinal tract leave the cerebral cortex in the internal capsule,
which carries all axons in and out of the cortex. Corticospinal fibers then descend • If lesions of the corticospinal tract
through the length of the brain stem in the ventral portion of the midbrain, pons,
occur above the pyramidal decussation,
and medulla.
a weakness is seen in muscles on the
In the lower medulla, 80–90% of corticospinal fibers cross at the decussation of the contralateral side of the body.
pyramids and continue in the contralateral spinal cord as the lateral corticospinal
• If lesions occur below this level, an
tract. The lateral corticospinal tract descends the full length of the cord in the
lateral part of the white matter. As it descends, axons leave the tract and enter the ipsilateral muscle weakness is seen.
gray matter of the ventral horn to synapse on lower motoneurons.
In contrast to upper motoneurons, the cell
bodies of lower motoneurons are ipsilateral
to the skeletal muscles that their axons
innervate. A lesion to any part of a lower
motoneuron will result in an ipsilateral
muscle weakness at the level of the lesion.
UMN cell bodies in cerebral
cortex and brainstem
Upp er m e dulla
Corticospinal tract in medulla
Pyramidal decussation Medullary pyramids
Extensor biased UMN tracts
Lo
wer
m
e
d
u
Lower motor neurons to ll a
muscles of upper limb
C
ervical Pyramidal decussation
A lesion here results in a si anp
cl
spastic weakness that is
ipsilateral and below the lesion ro
A lesion here results in a
flaccid weakness that is Corticospinal tract
ipsilateral and at the level of (flexor biased UMN tract)
the lesion
LMN
Lower motor neurons to
muscles of lower limb
L um bar
spinal
cord
Figure III 4 6. Course of Axons of Upper Motor Neurons in the Medulla and Spinal Cord
with Representative Cross Sections
257
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Reflex innervation of skeletal muscle
A reflex is initiated by a stimulus of a sensory neuron, which in turn innervates a
motoneuron and produces a motor response. In reflexes involving skeletal
muscles, the sensory stimulus arises from receptors in the muscle, and the motor
Pharmacology Biochemistry
response is a contraction or relaxation of one or more skeletal muscles. In the
spinal cord, lower motoneurons form the specific motor component of skeletal
muscle reflexes. Upper motoneurons provide descending control over the
reflexes.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Both alpha and gamma motoneurons are lower motoneurons that participate in
reflexes.
• Alpha motoneurons are large cells in the ventral horn that innervate
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences extrafusal muscle fibers. A single alpha motoneuron innervates a group of
muscle fibers, which constitutes a motor unit, the basic unit for voluntary,
postural, and reflex activity.
• Gamma motoneurons supply intrafusal muscle fibers, which are modified
skeletal muscle fibers. The intrafusal muscle fibers form the muscle
Microbiology
spindle, which acts as a sensory receptor in skeletal muscle stretch reflexes.
Both ends of the muscle spindle are connected in parallel with the extrafusal fibers,
so these receptors monitor the length and rate of change in length of extrafusal
fibers. Muscles involved with fine movements contain a greater density of spindles
than those used in coarse movements.
Commonly tested muscle stretch reflexes
The deep tendon (stretch, myotatic) reflex is monosynaptic and ipsilateral.
The afferent limb consists of a muscle spindle, Ia sensory neuron, and efferent
limb (lower motor neuron). These reflexes are useful in the clinical exam.
Reflex Cord Segment Involved Muscle Tested
Knee (patellar) L2–L4 (femoral n.) Quadriceps
Ankle S1 (tibial n.) Gastrocnemius
Elbow C5–C6 (musculocutaneous n.) Biceps
Elbow C7–C8 (radial n.) Triceps
Forearm C5–C6 (radial n.) Brachioradialis
Muscle stretch (myotatic) reflex
The muscle stretch (myotatic) reflex is the stereotyped contraction of a muscle in
response to stretch of that muscle. The stretch reflex is a basic reflex that occurs
in all muscles and is the primary mechanism for regulating muscle tone.
Muscle tone is the tension present in all resting muscle. Tension is controlled by
the stretch reflexes.
The best example of a muscle stretch or deep tendon reflex is the knee jerk
reflex. Tapping the patellar ligament stretches the quadriceps muscle and its
muscle spindles. Stretch of the spindles activates sensory endings (Ia afferents),
25
CHAPTER 4 | THE SPINAL CORD
and afferent impulses are transmitted to the cord. Some impulses from stretch
receptors carried by Ia fibers monosynaptically stimulate the alpha motoneurons
that supply the quadriceps. This causes contraction of the muscle and a sudden
extension of the leg at the knee. Afferent impulses simultaneously inhibit
antagonist muscles through interneurons (in this case, hamstrings).
Inverse muscle stretch reflex
The inverse muscle stretch reflex monitors muscle tension. This reflex uses Golgi
tendon organs (GTOs). These are encapsulated groups of nerve endings that
terminate between collagenous tendon fibers at the junction of muscle and tendon.
GTOs are oriented in series with the extrafusal fibers and respond to increases in
force or tension generated in that muscle. Increases in force in a muscle increase
the firing rate of Ib afferent neurons that innervate the GTOs, which, in turn,
polysynaptically facilitate antagonists and inhibit agonist muscles.
Muscle tone and reflex activity can be influenced by gamma motoneurons and by
upper motoneurons. Gamma motoneurons directly innervate the muscle spindles
and regulate their sensitivity to stretch. Upper motoneurons innervate gamma
motoneurons and also influence the sensitivity of muscle spindles to stretch.
Stimulation of gamma motoneurons causes intrafusal muscle fibers located at the
pole of each muscle spindle to contract, which activates alpha motoneurons,
causing an increase in muscle tone.
NOTE
Collaterals to
dorsal columns UMN lesions result in:
Dorsal root
• Hyperactive muscle stretch
Dorsal root
Inhibitory reflexes
ganglion
interneuron
• Clasp knife reflex due to
+
–
– oversensitive Golgi tendon
LMNs in
organs
ventral root
LMN
Muscle spindle
(activated by ↑ in Leg extensor
muscle stretch) muscles
(quadriceps)
Motor end plates
Leg flexor muscles
(hamstrings)
Patellar tendon
Golgi tendon
organ (activated
Muscle stretch by ↑ in muscle Inverse muscle
reflex force) stretch reflex
(causes stretched (causes activated
muscle to contract) muscle to relax)
Figure III 4 7. Muscle Stretch and Golgi Tendon Reflex Components
Figure III 4 7. Muscle Stretch and Golgi Tendon Reflex Components
25
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Flexor withdrawal reflex
The flexion withdrawal reflex is a protective reflex in which a stimulus (usually painful)
causes withdrawal of the stimulated limb. This reflex may be accompanied by a crossed
extension reflex in which the contralateral limb is extended to help support the body.
Pharmacology Biochemistry
CLINICAL CORRELATE
To correctly identify the cause of motor weakness, one must be able to distinguish
Physiology MedicalGenetics
between lesions of an upper versus lower motoneuron. Because a lesion to either
one will diminish one’s ability to voluntarily contract skeletal muscles, the key to
distinguishing them will be the condition of reflexes of the affected muscles.
A lesion of any part of a lower motoneuron will result in hypoactive muscle
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
stretch reflexes and a reduction in muscle tone (hypotonicity) because lower
motoneurons form the motor component of the reflex. Therefore, lower
motoneuron lesions result in a paresis combined with suppressed or absent
muscle stretch reflexes.
Microbiology
• Early sign: muscle fasciculations (twitches or contractions of muscle fibers
NOTE
that produce a twitch visible on the skin)
With lower motorneuron lesions, the
• Later sign: fibrillations (invisible 1 to 5 ms potentials), detected with
constellation of signs combining paresis with
electromyography
suppressed/absent reflexes, fasciculations,
• Pronounced wasting or atrophy of muscls
and atrophy is known as a flaccid paralysis.
• Flaccid paralysis ipsilateral and at the level of the lesion (almost always)
Neurologically, upper motoneurons including the corticospinal tract have a net
overall inhibitory effect on muscle stretch reflexes. As a result, they combine
paresis of skeletal muscles with muscle stretch or deep tendon reflexes that are
hyperactive or hypertonic. The hypertonia may be seen as decorticate rigidity
(i.e., postural flexion of the arm and extension of the leg) or decerebrate rigidity
(i.e., postural extension of the arm and leg) depending on the location of the
lesion. Lesions above the midbrain produce decorticate rigidity; lesions below
the midbrain produce decerebrate rigidity. Upper motoneuron lesions result in
atrophy of weakened muscles only as a result of disuse, because these muscles
can still be contracted by stimulating muscle stretch reflexes.
Upper motoneuron lesions are also accompanied by reversal of cutaneous reflexes,
which normally yield a flexor motor response. The best known of the altered
flexor reflexes is the Babinski sign. The test for the Babinski reflex is performed by
stroking the lateral surface of the sole of the foot with a slightly painful stimulus.
Normally, there is plantar flexion of the big toe. With a corticospinal tract lesion,
the Babinski reflex is present, which is characterized by extension of the great
toe and fanning of the other toes. Two other flexor reflexes, the abdominal and
cremasteric, are also lost in upper motoneuron lesions. The constellation of signs
combining paresis with increases or hyperactive reflexes, disuse atrophy of skeletal
muscles, and altered cutaneous reflexes is known as a spastic paresis. In contrast
to lower motoneuron lesions, lesions of upper motoneurons result in a spastic
paresis that is ipsilateral or contralateral and below the site of the lesion.
• A lesion anywhere in the spinal cord will cause an ipsilateral spastic paresis
below the level of the lesion.
• A lesion between the cerebral cortex and the medulla above the decussation of the
pyramids will cause a contralateral spastic paresis below the level of the lesion.
26
CHAPTER 4 | THE SPINAL CORD
Right Left
Upper motor Cerebral
neuron (UMN) cortex
A Precentral
A & B: gyrus
Spastic
paresis
contralateral B
and Caudal Brain
below lesion medulla
stem
(decussation)
C: Spastic
weakness
ipsilateral
Spinal and below
Lateral cord lesion
corticospinal C
tract D & E: Flaccid
paralysis
ipsilateral and
Function: at level
Voluntary refined of lesion
movements
of the distal extremities D E
Lower motor
Skeletal
neuron (LMN)
muscle
Figure III 4 8. Upper Versus Lower Motor Neuron Lesions
Figure III 4 8. Upper Versus Lower Motor Neuron Lesions
Table III 4 2. Upper Versus Lower Motoneuron Lesions
Upper Motor Neuron Lesion* Lower Motor Neuron Lesion†
Spastic paresis Flaccid paralysis
Hyperreflexia Areflexia
Babinski sign present No Babinski
Increased muscle tone Fasciculations
Clasp knife reflex Decreased muscle tone or atonia
Disuse atrophy of muscles Atrophy of muscle(s)
Decreased speed of voluntary movements Loss of voluntary movements
Large area of the body involved Small area of the body affected
*Deficits contralateral or ipsilateral and below the lesion
†Deficits ipsilateral and at the level of lesion
26
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Sensory Pathways
Two sensory systems, the dorsal column–medial lemniscal system and the
anterolateral (spinothalamic) system, use 3 neurons to convey sensory information
from peripheral sensory receptors to conscious levels of cerebral cortex. In both
Pharmacology Biochemistry
systems, the first sensory neuron that innervates a sensory receptor has a cell body
in the dorsal root ganglion and carries the information into the spinal cord in the
dorsal root of a spinal nerve. The first neuron synapses with a second neuron in
the brain stem or the spinal cord, and the axon of the second neuron crosses the
Physiology MedicalGenetics midline and is carried in a tract in the CNS. The axon of the second neuron then
synapses on a third neuron that is in the thalamus. The axon of the third neuron
projects to primary somatosensory cortex.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Midline
Parietal lobe
Right Left Brodmann
areas 3, 1, 2
Postcentral Somato
Cerebral
gyrus sensory
cortex
Microbiology cortex
Thalamus
1: first order neuron in sensory ganglion
3
Third order
2: second order neuron in CNS (axon neuron
always crosses midline)
Brain stem
3: third order neuron in thalamus Courses in or spinal cord
a tract or
lemniscus
2 Neuron #2 cell body is
ipsilateral to neuron #1
Second order
neuron Dorsal root ganglion
(always crosses cell (DRG)
midline near (pseudounipolar neuron)
1
cell body)
Receptor
First order
neuron
Figure FigurIeII 4III9.4G9e.nerGaelneral SSeennssoorryy PathwPaaythsways
26
CHAPTER 4 | THE SPINAL CORD
Ascending Pathways
The 2 most important ascending pathways use a 3 neuron system to convey
sensory information to the cortex. Key general features are listed below.
Pathway Function Overview
Dorsal Discriminative touch, 3 neuron system:
cloelmumninsc–amledial conscious propriocep
1 ̊ neuron: cell body in DRG
system tion, vibration, pressure
2 ̊ neuron: decussates
Anterolateral system Pain and temperature
3 ̊ neuron: thalamus
(spinothalamic)
(VPL) → cortex
Abbreviations: DRG, dorsal root ganglia; VPL, ventral posterolateral nucleus.
Dorsal column–medial lemniscal system
The dorsal column–medial lemniscal system carries sensory information for
discriminative touch, joint position (kinesthetic or conscious proprioceptive)
sense, vibratory, and pressure sensations from the trunk and limbs. The primary
afferent neurons in this system have their cell bodies in the dorsal root ganglia,
enter the cord via heavily myelinated dorsal root fibers, and then coalesce in the
fasciculus gracilis or fasciculus cuneatus in the dorsal funiculus of the spinal cord.
The fasciculus gracilis, found at all spinal cord levels, is situated closest to the
midline and carries input from the lower extremities and lower trunk. The
fasciculus cuneatus, found only at upper thoracic and cervical spinal cord levels, is
lateral to the fasciculus gracilis and carries input from the upper extremities and
upper trunk. These 2 fasciculi form the dorsal columns of the spinal cord that
carry the central processes of dorsal root ganglion cells and ascend the length of
the spinal cord to reach their second neurons in the lower part of the medulla.
In the lower part of the medulla, fibers in the fasciculus gracilis and fasciculus
cuneatus synapse with the second neurons found in the nucleus gracilis and
nucleus cuneatus, respectively. Cells in these medullary nuclei give rise to fibers
that cross the midline as internal arcuate fibers and ascend through the brain stem
in the medial lemniscus ascend through the brain stem in the medial lemniscus.
Fibers of the medial lemniscus terminate on cells of the ventral posterolateral
(VPL) nucleus of the thalamus. From the VPL nucleus, thalamocortical fibers
project to the primary somesthetic (somatosensory) area of the postcentral gyrus,
located in the most anterior portion of the parietal lobe.
26
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Right Left
Postcentral Cerebral
gyrus cortex
Pharmacology Biochemistry A
B
Thalamus
3 Ventropostero lateral
Physiology MedicalGenetics
nucleus (VPL)
C Medial lemniscus
Medulla
N. Cuneatus
N. Gracilis
2
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Function: Fasciculus
Conscious proprioception, limb Tcu5n↑eatus–upper
fine touch, vibration, (lateral column)
pressure, 2 point Dorsal Spinal
discrimination columns cord Fasciculus
Microbiology limb Tg6r↓acilis–lower
Lesion: (medial column)
Loss of above senses D
Site of lesion: Dorsal root
Affected side of body ganglion cell (DRG)
1
A, B, and C:
Contralateral and below Receptor
Pacinian corpuscle
D: –vibration
Ipsilateral and below Meissner corpuscle
–touch
muscle spindle
–proprioception
Figure IFIIigur4e 10.III D4or1sa0l. DorsaClolumCnolumn PaPtahtwhwaya–yM–Medeidailal LemniscLaelmniscalSystem System
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Lesions of the dorsal columns result in a loss of joint position sensation,
vibratory and pressure sensations, and 2 point discrimination. There is loss
of the ability to identify the characteristics of an object, called astereognosis
(e.g., size, consistency, form, shape), using only the sense of touch. Typically,
dorsal column–medial lemniscal lesions are evaluated by testing vibratory
sense using a 128 Hz tuning fork. Romberg sign is also used to distinguish
between lesions of the dorsal columns and the midline (vermal area) of the
cerebellum.
Romberg sign is tested by asking the patients to place their feet together.
If there is a marked deterioration of posture (if the patient sways) with the
eyes closed, this is a positive Romberg sign, suggesting that the lesion is in
the dorsal columns (or dorsal roots of spinal nerves). With the eyes open,
interruption of proprioceptive input carried by the dorsal columns can be
compensated for by visual input to the cerebellum. Therefore, if the patient
has balance problems and tends to sway with the eyes open, this is indicative
of cerebellar damage.
26
CHAPTER 4 | THE SPINAL CORD
Primary somatosensory cortex
Lemniscal fibers ascending
Neuron #3 Thalamus (VPL)
to thalamus (VPL)
Medial lemniscus
Crossing axons in lower medulla U p
per m e d ulla
Medullary pyramids
Neuron #2 in dorsal column nuclei
Lower Medial lemniscus
Fasciculus cuneatus m Dorsal
e d Cuneate nucleus
ull column
From T5 up a Gracile nucleus nuclei
including
upper limb C
er
v Crossing axons of neurons #2
ic
A lesion here results in deficits al (internal arcuate fibers)
s
that are ipsilateral and below p i
na
the lesion l
c
or
Fasciculus cuneatus
Fasciculus gracilis
Fasciculus gracilis
Neuron #1
Lower motor
From T6 down neuron
including
Fasciculus gracilis
lower limb
L um bar
spina
l
co rd
Lower motor
neuron
Reflex synapse
Figure III 4 11. Dorsal Column/Medial Lemniscal System in the Spinal Cord and Medulla
Figure III 4 11. Dorsal Column/Medial Lemniscal System in the Spinal Cord and Medulla
Anterolateral (spinothalamic tract) system CLINICAL CORRELATE
The anterolateral system carries pain, temperature, and crude touch sensations Because the pain and temperature
from the extremities and trunk.
information crosses almost as soon as it
Pain and temperature fibers have cell bodies in the dorsal root ganglia and enter enters the spinal cord, any unilateral lesion
the spinal cord via thinly myelinated and unmyelinated dorsal root fibers. Their of the spinothalamic tract in the spinal
fibers ascend or descend a couple of segments in the dorsolateral tract of Lissauer cord or brain stem will result in a
before entering and synapsing in the dorsal horn. The second neuron cell bodies
contralateral loss of pain and temperature.
are located in the dorsal horn gray matter. Axons from these cells cross in the
This is an extremely useful clinical sign
ventral white commissure just below the central canal of the spinal cord and
because it means that if a patient presents
coalesce to form the spinothalamic tract in the ventral part of the lateral funiculus.
The spinothalamic tract courses through the entire length of the spinal cord and with analgesia on one side of the trunk or
the brain stem to terminate in the VPL nucleus of the thalamus. Cells in the VPL limbs, the location of the lesion must be on
nucleus send pain and temperature information to the primary somatosensory the contralateral side of the spinal cord or
cortex in the postcentral gyrus.
brain stem. The analgesia begins 1 to 2
segments below the lesion and includes
everything below that level.
265
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Right Left
Postcentral Cerebral
gyrus cortex
Pharmacology Biochemistry
A
B
Physiology MedicalGenetics Thalamus
3 Ventropostero
lateral nucleus
(VPL)
Spinothalamic
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Brain
tract
Medulla stem
C
Microbiology
D
Lesion: Spinal
Anesthesia (loss of pain cord
and temperature
sensations) 2 Dorsal Ascend or descend
horn 1–2 segments
Site of lesion: in Lissauer’s tract
Affected side of body
DRG
A, B, C, and D:
Contralateral below the 1
lesion; tract intact rostral to Receptor
the lesion
FigureFiguIrIeI 4 12. IISIpin4othal1a2m.ic SpinothTarlaacmtic (Anterolateral TractSystem(A)nterolateral System)
26
CHAPTER 4 | THE SPINAL CORD
Primary somatosensory cortex
Neuron #3 Thalamus (VPL) To thalamus (VPL)
U p pe r
m e du lla Spinothalamic tract
Low
er
m
e
d
ull
Lissauer’s tract a
From arm
C
erv
ic Spinothalamic tract
al
s
A lesion here results
pi
n
al
in deficits that are
c
contralateral and 1–2 or
segments below
the lesion
Pain/temp fiber
Ventral white commissure
Spinothalamic tract
Neuron #2 in dorsal horn
Pain/temp fiber
From leg s p L in u a m l b c a o r rd Axons cross in ventral white
commissure below central canal
Neuron #1
Spinothalamic tract
Figure IIFIigur4e 13.III A4nte1r3o.laterAalnterolateral SysSteymstem iinnthtehe SpinSaplinal Cord Coarndd Meadnudlla Medulla
Spinocerebellar pathways
The spinocerebellar tracts mainly carry unconscious proprioceptive input from
muscle spindles and GTOs to the cerebellum, where this information is used to
help monitor and modulate movements. There are 2 major spinocerebellar
pathways:
• Dorsal spinocerebellar tract—carries input from the lower extremities and
lower trunk.
• Cuneocerebellar tract—carries proprioceptive input to the cerebellum
from the upper extremities and upper trunk.
The cell bodies of the dorsal spinocerebellar tract are found in Clarke’s nucleus,
which is situated in the spinal cord from T1 to L2. The cell bodies of the
cuneocerebellar tract are found in the medulla in the external cuneate nucleus.
267
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
CLINICAL CORRELATE Right Left
Lesions that affect only the spinocerebellar
Cerebellar
tracts are uncommon, but there is a group cortex
Pharmacoloogfy hereditary diseases in which Biocdheegmeinsetrryation
of spinocerebellar pathways is a prominent Cuneocerebellar
tract
feature. The most common of these is
Friedreich ataxia.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
• Usually inherited as an autosomal
Inferior
recessive trait
cerebellar
Brain
peduncle
• May involve spinocerebellar tracts, stem
Pathology dorsal columns, coBrteichoasvpiionraallScience/SoctiraalcStsc,iences
and cerebellum External
Dorsal
cuneate nucleus
• Ataxia of gait most common initial spinocerebellar 2
tract DRG
symptom
Microbiology
1
From
upper limb
Dorsal
(muscle spindles)
horn
Spinal
2 Clarke’s cord
nucleus
DRG
1
From
lower limb
(muscle spindles)
Figure III 4 1F4ig.ure SpinIIoIcere4bel1la4r. Spinocerebellar Tracts Tracts
26
CHAPTER 4 | THE SPINAL CORD
Ipsilateral loss of vibratory sense in lower limb
A
Ipsilateral loss of vibratory
B
sense in upper limb
Ipsilateral
C
E spastic
weakness
Horner’s
F
syndrome
G
(at T1)
D
Ipsilateral flaccid paralysis Contralateral loss of
pain and temperature
Figure III 4 15. Major spinal cord neural components and clinical
Figure III 4 15. Major spinal cord neural components and clinical anatomy depicted in
anatomy depicted in myelin stained section of upper thoracic cord.
myelin stained section of upper thoracic cord.
AFasciculus Gracilis, BFasciculus Cuneatus, CCorticospinal tract,
DAnterolateral system, E Dorsal Horn, F Lateral horn (preganglionic
sympathetic neurons), GVentral horn (lower motor neurons)
26
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Features to look for to identify
Cervical
a cord section:
Dorsal columns (DC)
Physiolog•yIs there a large ventral MedhicoarlnG?enetics
Corticospinal
Fasciculus cuneatus tract (CST)
YesNo
Lower motor
Fasciculus gracilis
neurons (LMN)
C5–T1, or L2–S2 T2–L1, C1–C4
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Spinothalamic
tract (SpTh)
• Are both dorsal columns present?
YesNo
Thoracic
Microbiology
Above T5 Below T5 DC
Lateral horn (contains
preganglionic
• Is there a lateral horn present?
sympathetic neurons CST
YesNo from T1–L2)
SpTh
T1–L2 C1–C8 or L3–S5 LMN
Lumbar
DC
CST
SpTh
LMN
Sacral
DC
CST
SpTh
LMN
Figure FigIuIrIe 4 III16.4 16S.pinaSlpinal CCoorrdd:: LevLeelsvels
27
CHAPTER 4 | THE SPINAL CORD
Spinal Cord Lesions
UMN cell body
Medial lemniscus Dorsal spinocerebellar
Loss of all sensation and flaccid
tract (unconscious weakness at level of lesion
proprioception from
Ipsilateral and below lesion:
lower limb)
impaired proprioception, vibration,
Pyramidal decussation
Nucleus gracilis 2 point discrimination, joint and
position sensation (purple);
Midline To skeletal muscles spastic weakness (brown)
in upper limb Contralateral and below lesion:
impaired pain and temperature
Corticospinal
Alpha motor neurons sensation begins 1–2 segments
tract (UMN)
(LMN) in spinal nerves below lesion
Fasciculus gracilis
(Vibration, touch, conscious
proprioception from lower limb)
Spinothalamic tract (pain
and temperature)
T1
LMN Hemisection at
Muscle spindle
Clarke’s nucleus (T1–L2)
afferent (la)
Reflex synapse
Alpha motor
Neuron in neuron
dorsal horn
Fibers
Pain, temperature
Vibration, touch,
A delta
conscious proprioception
fiber
Alpha motor neurons
(LMN) to skeletal
muscles in lower limb
Figure III 4 17. Spinal Cord OvervFiiegwure III a4nd17. BSropwinnal CoSrdéquarOdverview SyannddromeBrown Séqwuiatrhd LeSsyionndrome at wLitehft LeTsieonnth at Thoracic Segment
Left Tenth Thoracic Segment
271
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Brown Séquard syndrome
Hemisection of the cord results in a lesion of each of the 3 main neural systems: the
principal upper motoneuron pathway of the corticospinal tract, one or both dorsal
columns, and the spinothalamic tract. The hallmark of a lesion to these 3 long tracts is
Pharmacology Biochemistry
that the patient presents with 2 ipsilateral signs and 1 contralateral sign.
• Lesion of the corticospinal tract results in an ipsilateral spastic paresis
below the level of the injury.
Physiology MedicalGenetics • Lesion of the fasciculus gracilis or cuneatus results in an ipsilateral loss of
joint position sense, tactile discrimination, and vibratory sensations below
the lesion.
• Lesion of the spinothalamic tract results in a contralateral loss of pain and
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences temperature sensation starting 1 or 2 segments below the level of the
lesion.
At the level of the lesion, there will be an ipsilateral loss of all sensation, including
touch modalities as well as pain and temperature, and an ipsilateral flaccid paralysis in
Microbiology muscles supplied by the injured spinal cord segments (Figure III 4 15).
Polio
a. Flaccid paralysis
b. Muscle atrophy
CLINICAL CORRELATE
c. Fasciculations
Tabes patients present with paresthesias d. Areflexia
e. Common at lumbar levels
(pins and needles sensations), pain,
polyuria, and Romberg sign.
Tabes Dorsalis
a. “Paresthesias, pain, polyuria”
b. Associated with late stage syphilis, sensory
CLINICAL CORRELATE ataxia, positive Romberg sign: sways with eyes
closed, Argyll Robertson pupils, suppressed
Spastic bladder results from lesions of the
reflexes
spinal cord above the sacral spinal cord c. Common at lumbar cord levels
levels. There is a loss of inhibition of the
parasympathetic nerve fibers that innervate
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS)
the detrusor muscle during the filling stage.
a. Progressive spinal muscular atrophy (ventral horn)
Thus, the detrusor muscle responds to a b. Primary lateral sclerosis (corticospinal tract)
minimum amount of stretch, causing urge • Spastic paralysis in lower limbs
• Increased tone and reflexes
incontinence.
• Flaccid paralysis in upper limbs
c. Common in cervical enlargement
Anterior Spinal Artery (ASA) Occlusion
CLINICAL CORRELATE a. DC spared
b. All else bilateral signs
Atonic bladder results from lesions to the
c. Common at mid thoracic levels
sacral spinal cord segments or the sacral d. Spastic bladder
spinal nerve roots. Loss of pelvic splanchnic
motor innervation with loss of contraction of
ASA
the detrusor muscle results in a full bladder
with a continuous dribble of urine from the
Figure III 4 18. Lesions of the Spinal Cord
bladder. Figure III 4 18. Lesions of the Spinal Cord I
272
CHAPTER 4 | THE SPINAL CORD
Poliomyelitis
Poliomyelitis results from a relatively selective destruction of lower motoneurons
in the ventral horn by the poliovirus. The disease causes a flaccid paralysis of
muscles with the accompanying hyporeflexia and hypotonicity. Some patients may
recover most function, whereas others progress to muscle atrophy and permanent
disability.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, Lou Gehrig disease) is a relatively pure motor
system disease that affects both upper and lower motoneurons. The disease
typically begins at cervical levels of the cord and progresses either up or down the
cord. Patients present with bilateral flaccid weakness of the upper limbs and
bilateral spastic weakness of the lower limbs. Lower motoneurons in the
brain stem nuclei may be involved later.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Subacute Combined Degeneration
a. Vitamin B12, pernicious anemia Subacute combined degeneration patients
b. Demyelination of the: present paresthesias, bilateral spastic
• Dorsal columns (central and peripheral
weakness, Babinski sign Babinski signs, and
myelin)
• Spinocerebellar tracts antibodies to intrinsic factor.
• Corticospinal tracts (CST)
c. Upper thoracic or lower cervical cord
Syringomyelia
a. Cavitation of the cord (usually cervical)
b. Bilateral loss of pain and temperature at
the level of the lesion
CLINICAL CORRELATE
c. As the disease progresses, there is muscle
weakness; eventually flaccid paralysis and Syringomyelia may present with
atrophy of the upper limb muscles due to
hydrocephalus and Arnold Chiari I
destruction of ventral horn cells
malformation.
Hemisection: Brown Séquard Syndrome (cervical)
DC a. DC: Ipsilateral loss of position and vibratory
senses at and below level of the lesion
b. Spinothalamic tract: Contralateral loss of NOTE
CST pain and temp 1–2 segments below lesion
and ipsilateral loss at the level of the lesion Syringomyelia results in a “belt like” or
Spth
c. CST: Ipsilateral paresis below the level of
“cape like” loss of pain and temperature.
the lesion
d. LMN: Flaccid paralysis at the level of
LMN
the lesion
e. Descending hypothalamics: Ipsilateral
Horner syndrome (if cord lesion is above T1)
• Facial hemianhidrosis
• Ptosis (slight)
• Miosis
Figure FigurIeII 4III194. 19L.esioLnessions ooff thtehe SpiSnpalinal CordCorIdI II
27
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Occlusion of the anterior spinal artery
This artery lies in the anterior median sulcus of the spinal cord. Occlusion of the
anterior spinal artery interrupts blood supply to the ventrolateral parts of the cord,
including the corticospinal tracts and spinothalamic tracts. Below the level of the
Pharmacology Biochemistry
lesion, the patient exhibits a bilateral spastic paresis and a bilateral loss of pain and
temperature.
Physiology MedicalGenetics Syringomyelia
Syringomyelia is a disease characterized by progressive cavitation of the central
canal, usually in the cervical spinal cord but may involve other cord regions or the
medulla. Early in the disease, there is a bilateral loss of pain and temperature
sensation in the hands and forearms as a result of the destruction of spinothalamic
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
fibers crossing in the anterior white commissure. When the cavitation expands,
lower motoneurons in the ventral horns are compressed, resulting in bilateral
flaccid paralysis of upper limb muscles. A late manifestation of cavitation is Horner
syndrome, which occurs as a result of involvement of descending hypothalamic
Microbiology fibers innervating preganglionic sympathetic neurons in the T1 through T4 cord
segments. Horner syndrome consists of miosis (pupillary constriction), ptosis
(drooping eyelids), and anhidrosis (lack of sweating) in the face.
Tabes dorsalis
Tabes dorsalis is one possible manifestation of neurosyphilis. It is caused by
bilateral degeneration of the dorsal roots and secondary degeneration of the dorsal
columns. There may be impaired vibration and position sense, astereognosis,
paroxysmal pains, and ataxia, as well as diminished stretch reflexes or inconti
nence. Owing to the loss of proprioceptive pathways, individuals with tabes
dorsalis are unsure of where the ground is and walk with a characteristic and
almost diagnostic “high step stride”. Tabetic patients may also present with
abnormal pupillary responses (Argyll Robertson pupils).
Subacute combined degeneration
Subacute combined degeneration is seen most commonly in cases of vitamin B12
deficiency, sometimes related to pernicious anemia. The disease is characterized by
patchy losses of myelin in the dorsal columns and lateral corticospinal tracts,
resulting in a bilateral spastic paresis and a bilateral alteration of touch, vibration,
and pressure sensations below the lesion sites. Myelin in both CNS and PNS is
affected.
27
5
The Brain Stem
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Answer questions about cranial nerves
❏ Answer questions about sensory and motor neural systems
❏ Solve problems concerning medulla
❏ Demonstrate understanding of pons
❏ Interpret scenarios on midbrain
❏ Interpret scenarios on components of the ear, auditory, and vestibular
systems
❏ Demonstrate understanding of horizontal conjugate gaze
❏ Solve problems concerning blood supply to the brain stem
❏ Interpret scenarios on brain stem lesions
❏ Interpret scenarios on reticular formation
The brain stem is divisible into 3 continuous parts: the midbrain, the pons, and the
medulla. The midbrain is most rostral and begins just below the diencephalon.
The pons is in the middle and is overlain by the cerebellum. The medulla is caudal
to the pons and is continuous with the spinal cord.
The brain stem is the home of the origins or sites of termination of fibers in 9 of
the 12 cranial nerves (CNs).
CRANIAL NERVES
Two cranial nerves, the oculomotor and trochlear (CN III and IV), arise from the
midbrain. Four cranial nerves, the trigeminal, abducens, facial, and vestibuloco
chlear nerves (CN V, VI, VII, and VIII), enter or exit from the pons. Three cranial
nerves, the glossopharyngeal, vagus, and hypoglossal nerves (CN IX, X, and XII),
enter or exit from the medulla. Fibers of the accessory nerve arise from the
cervical spinal cord.
27
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Cingulate gyrus
Fornix
Thalamus
Corpus callosum
Pineal gland
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Septum pellucidum
Superior colliculus
Hypothalamus
Inferior colliculus
Physiology MedicalGenetics Optic chiasm
Pituitary
Cerebral aqueduct
Midbrain
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Tonsil
Pons
Fourth ventricle
Medulla
Microbiology
Figure III 5 1. Brain: Mid Sagittal Section
Figure III 5 1. Brain: Mid Sagittal Section
Olfactory bulb Optic chiasm
Olfactory tract
Pituitary
Optic nerve (II)
Mammillary body
Oculomotor nerve (III)
Cerebral peduncle
Uncus
Abducens nerve (VI)
Trigeminal nerve (V)
Facial nerve (VII)
Vestibulocochlear nerve (VIII)
Trochlear nerve (IV)
Glossopharyngeal nerve (IX)
Pyramid
Vagus nerve (X)
Olive
Accessory nerve (XI)
Cervical spinal nerves
Hypoglossal nerve (XII)
Figure III 5 2. Brain: Inferior View
Figure III 5 2. Brain: Inferior View
27
CHAPTER 5 | THE BRAIN STEM
Pretectal nuclei Optic chiasm
(Light reflex)
I (Olfactory tract)
Pineal II (Optic nerve)
body Third ventricle
Mammillary body
Superior Optic tract
Thalamus
colliculus
III
Cerebral
peduncle
Inferior
colliculus Midbrain IV
III, IV
V
IV
Pons VI
Cerebellar V, VI, VII, VIII VII
peduncles
VIII
Upper medulla
IX, X, XII
IX
Fourth
ventricle Lower medulla
X
Crossing point of fibers
forming medial lemniscus Olive
Dorsal
and corticospinal tracts XII XI
column
nuclei
Medial lemniscus Corticospinal tract
(Pyramid)
Dorsal columns
Spinothalamic tract
Dorsal Ventral
and descending
hypothalamic axons
FigureFigure IIIIII 55 33.. BBrraaiinn SteSmtemand aCndranialCranNiaelrve: SNuerrfvaec:e AnSatuormfayce Anatomy
Afferent fibers of cranial nerves enter the CNS and terminate in relation to
aggregates of neurons in sensory nuclei. Motor or efferent components of cranial
nerves arise from motor nuclei. All motor and sensory nuclei that contribute fibers
to cranial nerves are organized in a series of discontinuous columns according to
the functional component that they contain. Motor nuclei are situated medially,
closest to the midline, and sensory nuclei are situated lateral to the motor nuclei. A
cranial nerve nucleus or nerve will be found at virtually every transverse sectional
level of the brain stem.
27
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Periaqueductal
III nucleus and nucleus
gray matter
of Edinger Westphal
Cerebral aqueduct
Superior colliculus
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Medial geniculate
NOTE MLF
body (nucleus)
The descending hypothalamic fibers Medial lemniscus
Spinothalamic
course with the spinothalamic tract.
tract and descending Red nucleus
Physiology MedicalGenetics
hypothalamic fibers
Substantia nigra
Corticospinal tract
Cerebral peduncle
III
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Corticobulbar tract
Figure FiguIrIeI 5II4IA.5 4AU.ppeUrpper MMidibdrbariani;n; LevLelevelof Neorfve NeIrIvIe III
Microbiology
Cerebral aqueduct Inferior colliculus
Trochlear nucleus
MLF
Superior cerebellar
Spinothalamic tract
peduncle
and descending
hypothalamic fibers
Medial lemniscus
Corticospinal and
Basis pontis
corticobulbar tracts
Figure IFIIigure5 4BI.II 5Lo4wB.er LowerMidMbriadibnr;ain; LeLveevlel of NuocfleusNucleuCsN IV CN IV
Cerebellar hemisphere
Vermis
(cut section)
Superior cerebellar
Medial longitudinal
peduncle
fasciculus (MLF)
Fourth ventricle
Spinothalamic tract
and descending Main sensory
hypothalamic fibers nucleus of V
Medial lemniscus Motor nucleus of V
V
Corticospinal and
corticobulbar tracts
Figure FiguIrIeI 5 III4C.5 4CM.iddMleiddle PPoonnss;; LeLveelvel of NoefrveNerVve V
27
CHAPTER 5 | THE BRAIN STEM
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Fourth ventricle
Dentate nucleus
Spinal tract and
nucleus of V Cerebellum
SSuuperior
Spinothalamic ttrraacctt
cceerebellar peduncle
and descending ng
hypothalamic ffiibbeerrss
VVeermis
Superior FFaacial colliculus
olivary nucleus s
NNuucleus of nerve VI
Medial lemniscus cus
NNuucleus of nerve VII
Corticospinal aanndd VVIIII
corticobulbar tracts
VI
Figure FIiIgIure5 4DII.I 5Lo4wDe.r LowerPonPso;ns; LLeevveell ofoNfervNeservesVI andVIVIIand VII
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Fourth ventricle
Hypoglossal nucleus
Vestibular/cochlear nuclei Dorsal motor nucleus of nerve X
Solitary nucleus and tract
Inferior cerebellar peduncle
Spinothalamic tract
VIII
and descending
Ambiguus nucleus Hypothalamic fibers
Spinal tract and
Inferior olivary nucleus nucleus of V
X (and IX)
Medial lemniscus
XII
Pyramid (corticospinal tract)
Figure III 5 4E. Open Medulla
Figure III 5 4E. Open Medulla
27
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Nucleus gracilis
Internal arcuate
fibers forming Nucleus cuneatus
medial lemniscus
Spinal tract of V
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Spinal nucleus of V
Spinothalamic tract
Physiology MedicalGenetics and descending
hypothalamic fibers
Decussation
of pyramids
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Figure FigureIII II5I 54F.4F. CClloosseedd MeduMllaedulla
MicrobiologTyable III 5 1. Cranial Nerves: Functional Features
CN Name Type Function Results of Lesions
I Olfactory Sensory Smells Anosmia
II Optic Sensory Sees Visual field deficits (anopsia)
Loss of light reflex with III
Only nerve to be affected by MS
III Oculomotor Motor Innervates SR, IR, MR, IO extraocu Diplopia, external strabismus
lar muscles: adduction (MR) most
Loss of parallel gaze
important action
Ptosis
Raises eyelid (levator palpebrae
Dilated pupil, loss of light reflex with II
superioris)
Loss of near response
Constricts pupil (sphincter pupillae)
Accommodates (ciliary muscle)
CN Name Type Function Results of Lesions
IV Trochlear Motor Superior oblique—depresses and Weakness looking down with
abducts eyeball (makes eyeball adducted eye
look down and out)
Trouble going down stairs
Intorts
Head tilts away from lesioned side
V Trigeminal Mixed General sensation (touch, pain, V1—loss of general sensation in
temperature) of forehead/scalp/ skin of forehead/scalp
Ophthalmic
cornea
(V1) Loss of blink reflex with VII
General sensation of palate, nasal
Maxillary (V2) V2—loss of general sensation in
cavity, maxillary face, maxillary teeth
skin over maxilla, maxillary teeth
Mandibular
General sensation of anterior
(V3) V3—loss of general sensation in
two thirds of tongue, mandibular
skin over mandible, mandibular
face, mandibular teeth
teeth, tongue, weakness in chewing
Motor to muscles of mastication
Jaw deviation toward weak side
(temporalis, masseter, medial and
Trigeminal neuralgia—intractable
lateral pterygoids) and anterior
belly of digastric, mylohyoid, tensor pain in V2 or V3 territor
tympani, tensor palati
280
CHAPTER 5 | THE BRAIN STEM
Table III 5 1. Cranial Nerves: Functional Features (continued)
CN Name Type Function Results of Lesions
VI Abducens Motor Lateral rectus—abducts eyeball Diplopia, internal strabismus
Loss of parallel gaze, “pseudoptosis”
VII Facial Mixed To muscles of facial expression, Corner of mouth droops, cannot
posterior belly of digastric, close eye, cannot wrinkle forehead,
stylohyoid, stapedius loss of blink reflex, hyperacusis; Bell
palsy—lesion of nerve in facial canal
Salivation (submandibular,
sublingual glands) Pain behind ear
Skin behind ear Alteration or loss of taste (ageusia)
Taste in anterior 2/3 of tongue/ Eye dry and red
palate
Tears (lacrimal gland)
VIII Vestibulocochlear Sensory Hearing Sensorineural hearing loss
Angular acceleration (head turning) Loss of balance, nystagmus
Linear acceleration (gravity)
IX Glossopharyn Mixed Oropharynx sensation, carotid Loss of gag reflex with X
geal sinus/body
Salivation (parotid gland)
All sensation of posterior one third
of tongue
Motor to one
muscle—stylopharyngeus
X Vagus Mixed To muscles of palate and pharynx Nasal speech, nasal regurgitation
for swallowing except tensor palati
Dysphagia, palate droop
(V) and stylopharyngeus (IX)
Uvula pointing away from affected side
To all muscles of larynx (phonates)
Hoarseness/fixed vocal cord
Sensory of larynx and laryngopharynx
Loss of gag reflex with IX
Sensory of GI tract
Loss of cough reflex
To GI tract smooth muscle and
glands in foregut and midgut
CN Name Type Function Results of Lesions
XI Accessory Motor Head rotation to opposite side Weakness turning chin to opposite
(sternocleidomastoid) side
Elevates and rotates scapula Shoulder droop
(trapezius)
XII Hypoglossal Motor Tongue movement (styloglossus, Tongue pointing toward same
hyoglossus, genioglossus, and (affected) side on protrusion
intrinsic tongue
ismubsycles—Xp)alatoglossus
Abbreviations: CN, cranial nerve; IO, inferior oblique; IR, inferior rectus; MR, medial rectus; MS, multiple sclerosis; SR, superior rectus
28
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
SENSORY AND MOTOR NEURAL SYSTEMS
Each of the following 5 ascending or descending neural tracts, fibers, or fasciculi
courses through the brain stem and is found at every transverse sectional level.
Pharmacology Biochemistry
The medial lemniscus (ML) contains the axons from cell bodies found in the
dorsal column nuclei (gracilis and cuneatus) in the caudal medulla and represents
the second neuron in the pathway to the thalamus and cortex for discriminative
touch, vibration, pressure, and conscious proprioception. The axons in the ML
Physiology MedicalGenetics cross the midline of the medulla immediately after emerging from the dorsal
column nuclei. Lesions in the ML, in any part of the brain stem, result in a loss of
discriminative touch, vibration, pressure, and conscious proprioception from the
contralateral side of the body.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences The spinothalamic tract (part of anterolateral system) has its cells of origin in the
spinal cord and represents the crossed axons of the second neuron in the pathway
conveying pain and temperature to the thalamus and cortex. Lesions of the
spinothalamic tract, in any part of the brain stem, result in a loss of pain and
temperature sensations from the contralateral side of the body.
Microbiology
The corticospinal tract controls the activity of lower motoneurons, and interneu
ron pools for lower motoneurons course through the brain stem on their way to
the spinal cord. Lesions of this tract produce a spastic paresis in skeletal muscles of
the body contralateral to the lesion site in the brain stem.
The descending hypothalamic fibers arise in the hypothalamus and course
without crossing through the brain stem to terminate on preganglionic
sympathetic neurons in the spinal cord. Lesions of this pathway produce an
ipsilateral Horner syndrome. Horner syndrome consists of miosis (pupillary
constriction), ptosis (drooping eyelid), and anhidrosis (lack of sweating) in the
face ipsilateral to the side of the lesion.
Descending hypothalamic fibers course with the spinothalamic fibers in the lateral
part of the brain stem. Therefore, brain stem lesions producing Horner syndrome
may also result in a contralateral loss of pain and temperature sensations from the
limbs and body.
The medial longitudinal fasciculus is a fiber bundle interconnecting centers for
horizontal gaze, the vestibular nuclei, and the nerve nuclei of CN III, IV, and VI,
which innervate skeletal muscles that move the eyeball. This fiber bundle courses
close to the dorsal midline of the brain stem and also contains vestibulospinal
fibers, which course through the medulla to the spinal cord. Lesions of the
fasciculus produce internuclear ophthalmoplegia and disrupt the vestibulo
ocular reflex.
MEDULLA
In the caudal medulla, 2 of the neural systems—the corticospinal and dorsal
column–medial lemniscal pathways—send axons across the midline. The nucleus
gracilis and nucleus cuneatus give rise to axons that decussate in the caudal
medulla (the crossing axons are the internal arcuate fibers), which then form and
ascend in the medial lemniscus.
28
CHAPTER 5 | THE BRAIN STEM
The corticospinal (pyramidal) tracts, which are contained in the pyramids, course
ventromedially through the medulla. Most of these fibers decussate in the caudal
medulla just below the crossing of axons from the dorsal column nuclei, and then
travel down the spinal cord as the (lateral) corticospinal tract.
The olives are located lateral to the pyramids in the rostral two thirds of the
medulla. The olives contain the convoluted inferior olivary nuclei. The olivary
nuclei send climbing (olivocerebellar) fibers into the cerebellum through the
inferior cerebellar peduncle. The olives are a key distinguishing feature of the
medulla.
The spinothalamic tract and the descending hypothalamic fibers course together
in the lateral part of the medulla below the inferior cerebellar peduncle and near
the spinal nucleus and tract of CN V.
Cranial Nerve Nuclei
Spinal nucleus of V
The spinal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve (CN V) is located in a position
analogous to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. The spinal tract of the trigeminal
nerve lies just lateral to this nucleus and extends from the upper cervical cord (C2)
to the point of entry of the fifth cranial nerve in the pons. Central processes from
cells in the trigeminal ganglion conveying pain and temperature sensations from
the face enter the brain stem in the rostral pons but descend in the spinal tract of
CN V and synapse on cells in the spinal nucleus.
Solitary nucleus
The solitary nucleus receives the axons of all general and special visceral afferent
fibers carried into the CNS by CN VII, IX, and X. These include taste,
cardiorespiratory, and gastrointestinal sensations carried by these cranial nerves.
Taste and visceral sensory neurons all have their cell bodies in ganglia associated
with CN VII, IX, and X outside the CNS.
Nucleus ambiguus
The nucleus ambiguus is a column of large motoneurons situated dorsal to the
inferior olive. Axons arising from cells in this nucleus course in the ninth and
tenth cranial nerves. The component to the ninth nerve is insignificant. In the
tenth nerve, these fibers supply muscles of the soft palate, larynx, pharynx, and
upper esophagus. A unilateral lesion will produce ipsilateral paralysis of the soft
palate causing the uvula to deviate away from the lesioned nerve and nasal
regurgitation of liquids, weakness of laryngeal muscles causing hoarseness, and
pharyngeal weakness resulting in difficulty in swallowing.
Dorsal motor nucleus of CN X
These visceral motoneurons of CN X are located lateral to the hypoglossal nucleus
in the floor of the fourth ventricle. This is a major parasympathetic nucleus of the
brain stem, and it supplies preganglionic fibers innervating terminal ganglia in the
thorax and the foregut and midgut parts of the gastrointestinal tract.
28
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Hypoglossal nucleus
The hypoglossal nucleus is situated near the midline just beneath the central canal
and fourth ventricle. This nucleus sends axons into the hypoglossal nerve to
innervate all of the tongue muscles except the palatoglossus.
Pharmacology Biochemistry
The accessory nucleus
The accessory nucleus is found in the cervical spinal cord. The axons of the spinal
Physiology MedicalGenetics
accessory nerve arise from the accessory nucleus, pass through the foramen
magnum to enter the cranial cavity, and join the fibers of the vagus to exit the
cranial cavity through the jugular foramen. As a result, intramedullary lesions do
not affect fibers of the spinal accessory nerve. The spinal accessory nerve supplies
the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
The rootlets of the glossopharyngeal (CN IX) and vagus (CN X) nerves exit
between the olive and the fibers of the inferior cerebellar peduncle. The
hypoglossal nerve (CN XII) exits more medially between the olive and the
Microbiology medullary pyramid.
PONS
The pons is located between the medulla (caudally) and the midbrain (rostrally).
The cerebellum overlies the pons. It is connected to the brain stem by 3 pairs of
cerebellar peduncles. The fourth ventricle is found between the dorsal surface of
the pons and the cerebellum. The ventral surface of the pons is dominated by
fibers, which form a large ventral enlargement that carries fibers from pontine
nuclei to the cerebellum in the middle cerebellar peduncle. This ventral
enlargement is the key distinguishing feature of the pons.
The corticospinal tracts are more diffuse in the pons than in the medulla and are
embedded in the transversely coursing fibers that enter the cerebellum in the
middle cerebellar peduncle.
The medial lemniscus is still situated near the midline but is now separated from
the corticospinal tracts by the fibers forming the middle cerebellar peduncle. The
medial lemniscus has changed from a dorsoventral orientation in the medulla to a
more horizontal orientation in the pons.
The spinothalamic tract and the descending hypothalamic fibers continue to
course together in the lateral pons.
The lateral lemniscus, an ascending auditory pathway, is lateral and just dorsal to
the medial lemniscus. The lateral lemniscus carries the bulk of ascending auditory
fibers from both cochlear nuclei to the inferior colliculus of the midbrain.
The medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) is located near the midline just beneath
the fourth ventricle.
28
CHAPTER 5 | THE BRAIN STEM
Cranial Nerve Nuclei
Abducens nucleus
The abducens nucleus is found near the midline in the floor of the fourth ventricle
just lateral to the MLF.
Facial motor nucleus
The facial motor nucleus is located ventrolateral to the abducens nucleus. Fibers
from the facial nucleus curve around the posterior side of the abducens nucleus
(the curve forms the internal genu of the facial nerve), then pass ventrolaterally to
exit the brain stem at the pontomedullary junction.
Superior olivary nucleus
The superior olivary nucleus lies immediately ventral to the nucleus of CN VII and
receives auditory impulses from both ears by way of the cochlear nuclei. The
cochlear nuclei are found at the pontomedullary junction just lateral to the inferior
cerebellar peduncle.
Vestibular nuclei
The vestibular nuclei are located near the posterior surface of the pons lateral to
the abducens nucleus, and extend into the medulla.
Cochlear nuclei
The dorsal and ventral cochlear nuclei are found at the pontomedullary junction.
All of the fibers of the cochlear part of CN VIII terminate here.
Trigeminal nuclei
Motor Nucleus—Pons
The motor nucleus of CN V is located in the pons just medial to the main sensory
nucleus of the trigeminal and adjacent to the point of exit or entry of the trigeminal
nerve fibers. These motor fibers supply the muscles of mastication (masseter,
temporalis, and medial and lateral pterygoid (Figure IV 5 3).
Main Sensory Nucleus—Pons
The main sensory nucleus is located just lateral to the motor nucleus.
The main sensory nucleus receives tactile and pressure sensations from the face,
scalp, oral cavity, nasal cavity, and dura.
Spinal Trigeminal Nucleus—Spinal cord to pons
The spinal trigeminal nucleus is a caudal continuation of the main sensory
nucleus, extending from the mid pons through the medulla to the cervical cord.
Central processes from cells in the trigeminal ganglion conveying pain and
temperature sensations from the face descend in the spinal tract of V and synapse
on cells in the spinal nucleus.
28
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
NOTE Mesencephalic Nucleus—Midbrain
VPM relays touch, pain, temperature (CN V) The mesencephalic nucleus of CN V is located at the point of entry of the fifth
nerve and extends into the midbrain. It receives proprioceptive input from joints,
and taste (CN VII, IX) sensations to cortex.
muscles of mastication, extraocular muscles, teeth, and the periodontium. Some of
Pharmacology Biochemistry
these fibers synapse monosynaptically on the motoneurons, forming the sensory
limb of the jaw jerk reflex.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Ophthalmic
Somatosensory cortex (CN V1)
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
VPM
(neuron #3) Maxillary
in thalamus) (CN V2)
Microbiology 12 34
Mandibular
(CN V3)
Ventral
trigeminal
tract
Mesencephalic nucleus of V
Muscle spindle afferent
Motor Main sensory nucleus of V
nucleus
of V Tactile afferent
To muscles of mastication
Pain afferent
CN V
Nerves VII, IX, and X
(from skin in or near
V3
external auditory meatus)
V2
Spinal tract of V
V1
Spinal trigeminal nucleus
Figure III 5 5. Shaded areas indicate regions of face and scalp innervated by branches of the 3 divisions of CN V.
Figure III 5 5. Shaded areas indicate regions of face and scalp innervated by
branchDeostted lines ofindtihcaete 3codnicveinsitorincs numberoedf CN“onioVn. Dostktiend” regionlisnes emaninatdiincgate postecroionrcleyntric from nonsuembered
“oniaonnd mouthskin” that reghiaovnes a rostreamlanatintog caudal rpeopsretesreinotralytion ifnromthe spnionsael nucalneuds moofuthVin thethatbrain havsetem. a rostral to
caudal representation in the spinal nucleus of V in the brain stem.
28
CHAPTER 5 | THE BRAIN STEM
Cranial Nerves V, VI, VII, and VIII
Four cranial nerves emerge from the pons. Cranial nerves VI, VII, and VIII
emerge from the pontomedullary junction. The facial nerve is located medial to
the vestibulocochlear nerve. The abducens nerve (CN VI) emerges near the
midline lateral to the corticospinal tract. The trigeminal nerve (CN V) emerges
from the middle of the pons.
MIDBRAIN
The midbrain (mesencephalon) is located between the pons and diencephalon.
The cerebral aqueduct, a narrow channel that connects the third and fourth
ventricles, passes through the midbrain. The inferior colliculi and superior
colliculi are found on the dorsal aspect of the midbrain above the cerebral aque
duct. The inferior colliculus processes auditory information received bilaterally
from the cochlear nuclei by axon fibers of the lateral lemniscus. The superior
colliculi help direct movements of both eyes in gaze. The pretectal region is located
just beneath the superior colliculi and in front of the oculomotor complex. This
area contains interneurons involved in the pupillary light reflex. The massive
cerebral peduncles extend ventrally from the midbrain. The cerebral peduncles
contain corticospinal and corticobulbar fibers. The interpeduncular fossa is the
space between the cerebral peduncles.
The substantia nigra is the largest nucleus of the midbrain. It appears black to dark
brown in the freshly cut brain because nigral cells contain melanin pigments.
Neurons in the substantia nigra utilize Dopamine and GABA as neurotransmitters.
The medial lemniscus and spinothalamic tract and descending hypothalamic fibers
course together ventrolateral to the periaqueductal gray.
The MLF continues to be located near the midline, just beneath the cerebral
aqueduct.
The mesencephalic nuclei of the trigeminal nerve are located on either side of the
central gray.
Cranial Nerve Nuclei
The trochlear nucleus is located just beneath the periaqueductal gray near the
midline between the superior and inferior colliculi. The oculomotor nucleus and
the nucleus of Edinger Westphal are found just beneath the periaqueductal gray
near the midline at the level of the superior colliculi.
Two cranial nerves emerge from the midbrain: the oculomotor (CN III) and the
trochlear (CN IV) nerves.
The oculomotor nerve arises from the oculomotor nucleus and exits ventrally
from the midbrain in the interpeduncular fossa. CN III also contains pregangli
onic parasympathetic axons that arise from the nucleus of Edinger Westphal,
which lies adjacent to the oculomotor nucleus.
Axons of the trochlear nerve decussate in the superior medullary velum and exit
the brain stem near the posterior midline just inferior to the inferior colliculi.
28
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Corticobulbar (Corticonuclear) Innervation of Cranial Nerve Nuclei
Corticobulbar fibers serve as the source of upper motoneuron innervation of lower
motoneurons in cranial nerve nuclei. Corticobulbar fibers arise in the motor
cortex and influence lower motoneurons in all brain stem nuclei that innervate
Pharmacology Biochemistry
skeletal muscles. This includes:
• Muscles of mastication (CN V)
• Muscles of facial expression (CN VII) – (partially bilateral)
Physiology MedicalGenetics
• Palate, pharynx, and larynx (CN X)
• Tongue (CN XII)
• Sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles (CN XI)
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
UMN innervation
Right Left to LMN in cranial
nerves is bilateral
Microbiology
Upper motor Cerebral cortex
neuron (UMN)
A Precentral
gyrus
UMN innervation
to LMN in spinal
nerves is
B
contralateral
Caudal Brain Lower motor
medulla stem neuron in a CN
(decussation)
Spinal cord
Lateral
corticospinal C
tract
Function:
Voluntary refined
Skeletal
movements
muscle
of the distal extremities
D
E
Lower motor
neuron (LMN)
Figure III 5 6. Upper Motor Neuron Innervation of
Figure III 5 6. Upper Motor Neuron Innervation of
SSppiinnaall NervNeservesand Carnadnial CrNaneiravles Nerves
The corticobulbar innervation of cranial nerve lower motoneurons is predomi
nantly bilateral, in that each lower motoneuron in a cranial nerve nucleus receives
input from corticobulbar axons arising from both the right and the left cerebral
cortex. The major exception is that only some of the LMNs of the facial nerve (CN
VII) receive a contralateral innervation.
28
CHAPTER 5 | THE BRAIN STEM
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Facial Paralysis
The upper motoneuron innervation of lower motoneurons in the facial
motor nucleus is different and clinically significant. Like most cranial nerve
lower motoneurons, the corticobulbar innervation of facial motoneurons to
muscles of the upper face (which wrinkle the forehead and shut the eyes) is
bilateral. The corticobulbar innervation of facial motoneurons to muscles
of the mouth, however, is contralateral only. Clinically, this means that one
can differentiate between a lesion of the seventh nerve and a lesion of the
corticobulbar fibers to the facial motor nucleus.
• A facial nerve lesion (e.g., Bell Palsy) will lead to complete ipsilateral
paralysis of muscles of facial expression (e.g., an inability to wrinkle the
forehead, shut the eyes) and a drooping of the corner of the mouth.
• A corticobulbar lesion will lead to only a drooping of the corner of the
mouth on the contralateral side of the face (and no other facial motor
deficits). No other cranial deficits are seen because virtually every other
cranial nerve nucleus is bilaterally innervated.
In some individuals, the hypoglossal nucleus may receive mainly contralateral
corticobulbar innervation. If these corticobulbar fibers are lesioned, the tongue
muscles undergo transient weakness without atrophy or fasciculations and may
deviate away from the injured corticobulbar fibers. If, for example, the lesion is
in corticobulbar fibers on the left, there is transient weakness of the right tongue
muscles, causing a deviation of the tongue toward the right side upon protrusion.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Cortex Cortex
Lesion A: left lower face weakness
UMN UMN
Lesion B: complete left face weakness
A
Facial nucleus
UMN
of pons (LMN)
ABBREVIATIONS
Upper face
Normal: division UMN = upper motoneuron
Lower face LMN = lower motoneuron
Wrinkles forehead division
Shuts eye
Flares nostrils
Smiles
R L
Figure III 5 7. Corticobulbar Innervation of the Facial Motor Nucleus
Figure III 5 7. Corticobulbar Innervation of the Facial Motor Nucleus
289
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
EAR, AUDITORY, AND VESTIBULAR SYSTEMS
Each ear consists of 3 components: 2 air filled spaces, the external ear and the
middle ear; and the fluid filled spaces of the inner ear.
Pharmacology Biochemistry
The external ear includes the pinna and the external auditory meatus, which
extends to the tympanic membrane. Sound waves travel through the external
auditory canal and cause the tympanic membrane (eardrum) to vibrate. Move
ment of the eardrum causes vibrations of the ossicles in the middle ear (i.e., the
Physiology MedicalGenetics malleus, incus, and stapes). Vibrations of the ossicles are transferred through the
oval window and into the inner ear.
The middle ear lies in the temporal bone, where the chain of 3 ossicles connects
the tympanic membrane to the oval window. These auditory ossicles amplify the
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences vibrations received by the tympanic membrane and transmit them to the fluid of
the inner ear with minimal energy loss. The malleus is inserted in the tympanic
membrane, and the stapes is inserted into the membrane of the oval window. Two
small skeletal muscles, the tensor tympani and the stapedius, contract to prevent
damage to the inner ear when the ear is exposed to loud sounds. The middle ear
Microbiology
cavity communicates with the nasopharynx via the eustachian tube, which allows
air pressure to be equalized on both sides of the tympanic membrane.
The inner ear consists of a labyrinth (osseous and membranous) of interconnected
sacs (utricle and saccule) and channels (semicircular ducts and the cochlear duct)
that contain patches of receptor or hair cells that respond to airborne vibrations or
movements of the head. Both the cochlear duct and the sacs and channels of the
vestibular labyrinth are filled with endolymph, which bathes the hairs of the hair
cells. Endolymph is unique because it has the inorganic ionic composition of an
intracellular fluid but it lies in an extracellular space. The intracellular ionic
composition of endolymph is important for the function of hair cells. Perilymph,
ionically like a typical extracellular fluid, lies outside the endolymph filled
labyrinth.
Spiral Scala vestibuli
Scala media
ganglion (perilymph)
(endolymph)
Stria vascularis
(endolymph
Semicircular
Ampulla production)
duct
Tectorial membrane
Ossicles Semicircular
canal
Basilar membrane
Organ of Corti
Scala tympani
(perilymph)
VIII nerve
(cochlear division)
Cross section through
BA
one turn of the cochlea
Tympanic Eustachian BA
membrane Oval tube Base Apex
Round (High pitch) (Low pitch)
window
window
Figure III 5 8. Structures of the Inner Ear
Figure III 5 8. Structures of the Inner Ear
29
CHAPTER 5 | THE BRAIN STEM
Semicircular
ducts (endolymph)
Semicircular
canals (perilymph)
Ampulla
Utricle (endolymph)
Malleus
Saccule
(endolymph)
Incus
Scala vestibuli
(perilymph)
Stapes
Scala media
(endolymph)
Tympanic
membrane Scala tympani
(perilymph
Oval Round
window window
Endolymph High K+ Vestibule
Eustachian
Perilymph Low Na+
tube
Figure III 5 9. Distribution of Endolymph and
Figure III 5 9. Distribution of Endolymph and Perilymph in Inner Ear
Perilymph in Inner Ear
Auditory System CLINICAL CORRELATE
The cochlear duct is the auditory receptor of the inner ear. It contains hair cells, Middle ear diseases (otitis media, otoscle
which respond to airborne vibrations transmitted by the ossicles to the oval rosis) result in a conductive hearing loss
window. The cochlear duct coils 2 and a quarter turns within the bony cochlea and because of a reduction in amplification
contains hair cells situated on an elongated, highly flexible, basilar membrane.
provided by the ossicles.
High frequency sound waves cause maximum displacement of the basilar mem
brane and stimulation of hair cells at the base of the cochlea, whereas low frequen Lesions of the facial nerve in the brain stem
cy sounds maximally stimulate hair cells at the apex of the cochlea. or temporal bone (Bell palsy) may result in
hyperacusis, an increased sensitivity to loud
The spiral ganglion contains cell bodies whose peripheral axons innervate
sounds.
auditory hair cells of the organ of Corti. The central axons from these bipolar cells
form the cochlear part of the eighth cranial nerve. All of the axons in the cochlear
part of the eighth nerve enter the pontomedullary junction and synapse in the
CLINICAL CORRELATE
ventral and dorsal cochlear nuclei. Axons of cells in the ventral cochlear nuclei
bilaterally innervate the superior olivary nuclei in the pons. The superior olivary Presbycusis results from a loss of hair cells
nuclei are the first auditory nuclei to receive binaural input and use the binaural at the base of the cochlea.
input to localize sound sources. The lateral lemniscus carries auditory input from
the cochlear nuclei and the superior olivary nuclei to the inferior colliculus in the
CLINICAL CORRELATE
midbrain. Each lateral lemniscus carries information derived from both ears;
however, input from the contralateral ear predominates. Sensorineural hearing loss: air conduction >
bone conduction
Conductive hearing loss: bone conduction >
air conduction
291
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
The inferior colliculus sends auditory information to the medial geniculate body
(MGB) of the thalamus. From the MGB, the auditory radiation projects to the
primary auditory cortex located on the posterior portion of the transverse
temporal gyrus (Heschl’s gyrus; Brodmann areas 41 and 42). The adjacent auditory
Pharmacology Biochemistry association area makes connections with other parts of the cortex, including
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Wernicke’s area, the cortical area for the comprehension of language.
Lesions Causing Hearing Loss
Lesions of the cochlear part of the eighth
Right Left
Physiologynerve or cochlear nuclei insideMedicthaelGenbertaicins
stem at the pontomedullary junction result Superior Cerebral
temporal gyrus cortex
in a profound unilateral sensorineural
hearing loss (A). All other lesions to auditory
Pathologystructures in the brain stBemeh,aviorathlSaclaiemnucse,/SocialScoirences
cortex result in a bilateral suppression of
Medial
hearing and a decreased ability to localize a geniculate
Thalamus
sound source (B). If a patient presents with a body
Microbiology
significant hearing loss in one ear, the lesion
is most likely in the middle ear, inner ear,
eighth nerve, or cochlear nuclei, and not at Inferior
higher levels of the auditory system. colliculus
Lesion B
Midbrain
Lateral
lemniscus
Superior
olivary Pons
nucleus
Spiral
Trapezoid ganglion
body
Cochlear
hair cell
Lesion A
Cochlear
nucleus
⯑igure F⯑igu⯑re⯑⯑⯑⯑II⯑I⯑5⯑A1u0d.itoryAuditory SysStyemstem
Hearing Loss
Conductive: passage of sound waves through external or middle ear is
interrupted. Causes: obstruction, otosclerosis, otitis media
Sensorineural: damage to cochlea, CN VIII, or central auditory connections
29
CHAPTER 5 | THE BRAIN STEM
Auditory Tests
Weber test: place tuning fork on vertex of skull. If unilateral conductive loss →
vibration is louder in affected ear; if unilateral sensorineural loss → vibration is
louder in normal ear.
Rinne test: place tuning fork on mastoid process (bone conduction) until
vibration is not heard, then place fork in front of ear (air conduction). If unilateral
conductive loss → no air conduction after bone conduction is gone; if unilateral
sensorineural loss → air conduction present after bone conduction is gone.
Vestibular System
Sensory receptors
The vestibular system contains 2 kinds of sensory receptors, one kind in the utricle
and the saccule and the other in the semicircular ducts.
The utricle and the saccule are 2 large sacs, each containing a patch of hair cells in
a macula. Each macula responds to linear acceleration and detects positional
changes in the head relative to gravity. There are 3 semicircular ducts in the inner
ear, each lying in a bony semicircular canal. Each semicircular duct contains an
ampullary crest of hair cells that detect changes in angular acceleration resulting
from circular movements of the head. The 3 semicircular ducts—anterior, poste
rior, and horizontal—are oriented such that they lie in the 3 planes of space.
Circular movements of the head in any plane will depolarize hair cells in a semicir
cular duct in one labyrinth and hyperpolarize hair cells in the corresponding duct
in the opposite labyrinth.
Vestibular nuclei
There are 4 vestibular nuclei located in the rostral medulla and caudal pons. The
vestibular nuclei receive afferents from the vestibular nerve, which innervates
receptors located in the semicircular ducts, utricle, and saccule. Primary vestibular
fibers terminate in the vestibular nuclei and the flocculonodular lobe of the
cerebellum.
Vestibular fibers
Secondary vestibular fibers, originating in the vestibular nuclei, join the MLF and
supply the motor nuclei of CN III, IV, and VI. These fibers are involved in the
production of conjugate eye movements. These compensatory eye movements
represent the efferent limb of the vestibulo ocular reflex, which enables the eye to
remain focused on a stationary target during movement of the head or neck. Most
of our understanding of the vestibulo ocular reflex is based on horizontal head
turning and a corresponding horizontal movement of the eyes in the direction
opposite to that of head turning. For example, when the head turns horizontally to
the right, both eyes will move to the left using the following vestibulo ocular
structures. Head turning to the right stimulates hairs cells in the right semicircular
ducts. The right eighth nerve increases its firing rate to the right vestibular nuclei.
These nuclei then send axons by way of the MLF to the right oculomotor nucleus
and to the left abducens nucleus. The right oculomotor nerve to the right medial
rectus adducts the right eye, and the left abducens nerve to the left lateral rectus
abducts the left eye. The net effect of stimulating these nuclei is that both eyes will
look to the left.
29
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
NOTE Vestibular System (VIII)
Vestibular functions: equilibrium, Three semicircular ducts respond to angular acceleration and deceleration of
posture, VOR the head. The utricle and saccule respond to linear acceleration and the pull of
gravity. There are 4 vestibular nuclei in the medulla and pons, which receive
Pharmacology Biochemistry
information from CN VIII. Fibers from the vestibular nuclei join the MLF and
supply the motor nuclei of CNs III, IV, and VI, thereby regulating conjugate eye
movements. Vestibular nuclei also receive and send information to the flocculo
nodular lobe of the cerebellum.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Vestibulo Ocular Reflex
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Alesion of the vestibular nuclei or nerve
H e a d ro tate s to righ t
Pathology(in this example, on the Bleefhta)vioraplSrocdieunccees/SocialScaiences
v
ti
e
o
s
n
tibul
o
ar
f the
n
e
y
y
s
e
ta
s
gmus
toward
with
the
a
le
s
s
l
i
o
o
w
n
de
a
v
n
i
d
a
a
N ysta gm u s (fa st c o m po ne nt)
Microbiolog
fa
y
st correction back to the right. ye s tra ck ( lso w com p o ne
n t)
VOR
➍ Both eyes look left
Lateral rectus Medial rectus
muscle muscle
III
VI
Medial ➊ Endolymph flow
longitudinal stimulates hair cells
fasciculus
Cerebellar
peduncles Vestibular
ganglion
VIII
Vestibular
nuclei
➋ Increases
Lesion site nerve firing
(see Clinical rate
Correlate)
➌ Stimulates vestibular
nuclei
Lateral vestibulospinal
tract (to antigravity muscles)
Figure III 5 11. Vestibulo Ocular Reflex (VOR)
Figure III 5 11. Vestibulo Ocular Reflex (VOR)
294
CHAPTER 5 | THE BRAIN STEM
Caloric Test NOTE
This stimulates the horizontal semicircular ducts; can be used as a test of brain Cold water mimics a lesion of the vestibular
stem function in unconscious patients.
system.
Normal results:
• Cold water irrigation of ear → nystagmus to opposite side
• Warm water irrigation of ear → nystagmus to same side
• COWS: cold opposite, warm same
First—Slow Component (Slow Tracking)
R L
Second—Fast Component (Nystagmus)
R L (Left side
lesion)
Figure III 5 12. Vestibular System
Figure III 5 12. Vestibular System
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Vestibular dysfunction may result from a peripheral or central lesion.
Vertigo (the perception of rotation, involving either the subject or the external
space) may result from a lesion of the peripheral (end organ, nerve) or central
(nuclear, brain stem pathways) vestibular structures. The vertigo is usually
severe in peripheral disease and mild in brain stem disease. Chronic vertigo (i.e.,
persisting longer than 2–3 weeks) strongly suggests a central lesion. Vertigo may
also be caused by a variety of drugs, including anticonvulsants, aspirin, alcohol,
and certain sedatives and antibiotics.
Ménière disease (common in middle age) may result from distention of
the fluid spaces in the cochlear and vestibular parts of the labyrinth. It is
characterized by abrupt, recurrent attacks of vertigo lasting minutes to hours,
accompanied by tinnitus or deafness (usually in only one ear). In acute
episodes, nausea/vomiting, a sensation of fullness/pressure in the ear, and an
inability to stand are seen.
29
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Eye Movement Control Systems
For the eyes to move together (conjugate gaze), the oculomotor nuclei and
abducens nuclei are interconnected by the medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF).
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Horizontal gaze is controlled by 2 gaze centers: frontal eye field (contralateral
gaze), and PPRF (paramedian pontine reticular formation, ipsilateral gaze).
Nystagmus
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Nystagmus refers to rhythmic oscillations of the eyes slowly to one side followed
by a rapid reflex movement in the opposite direction. Nystagmus is defined by the
direction of the rapid reflex movement or the fast phase. It is usually horizontal,
although rotatory or vertical nystagmus may also occur.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Unilateral vestibular nerve or vestibular nucleus lesions may result in a vestibular
nystagmus. In a pathologic vestibular nystagmus, the initial slow phase is the
response to the pathology, and the fast phase is the correction attempt made by the
cortex in response to the pathology. Consider this example: if the left vestibular
Microbiology
nerve or nuclei are lesioned, because of the loss of balance between the 2 sides, the
right vestibular nuclei are unopposed and act as if they have been stimulated,
causing both eyes to look slowly to the left. This is the slow phase of a pathologic
vestibular nystagmus. Because the head did not move, the cortex responds by
moving both eyes quickly back to the right, the direction of the fast phase of the
nystagmus.
NOTE The integrity of the vestibulo ocular reflex can be an indicator of brain stem
integrity in comatose patients. To test this reflex, a vestibular nystagmus is induced
To remember the direction of the fast phase
by performing a caloric test in which an examiner introduces warm or cool water
of vestibular nystagmus in a caloric test
into an external auditory meatus. Warm water introduced into the external ear
toward the warm water side and away
stimulates the horizontal semicircular duct and causes the eyes to move slowly in
from the cool water side, remember the the opposite direction. Because the head did not turn, the eyes are moved quickly
mnemonic COWS: back by the cortex (if intact) toward the same ear where the warm water was
introduced, producing a fast phase of nystagmus to the same side. Introduction of
• Cool
cool water into the external ear mimics a lesion; the horizontal duct activity is
• Opposite inhibited on the cool water side, and the opposite vestibular complex moves
the eyes slowly toward the cool water ear. The corrective or fast phase of the
• Warm nystagmus moves the eyes quickly away from the ear where the cool water was
introduced.
• Same
HORIZONTAL CONJUGATE GAZE
The eyeballs move together in conjugate gaze. The ocular muscles function to
move and position both eyes as a unit so that an image falls on a corresponding
spot on the retina of each eye. The slightest weakness in the movements of one eye
causes diplopia, the presence of a double image, indicating that the image has been
shifted to a different position on the retina of the affected side. Although gaze in all
planes is possible, the muscles and cranial nerves involved in horizontal conjugate
gaze, or abduction and adduction of both eyes together, are the most important
eye movements.
29
CHAPTER 5 | THE BRAIN STEM
Abduction of each eyeball is performed largely by the lateral rectus muscle, which
is innervated by the abducens nerve (CN VI). Adduction of the eyeball is per
formed by the medial rectus muscle, which is innervated by the oculomotor nerve
(CN III). Therefore, for both eyes to look to the right in horizontal gaze, the right
abducens nerve and the right lateral rectus muscle must be active to abduct the
right eye, and the left oculomotor nerve and the left medial rectus muscle must be
active to adduct the left eye. The net effect is that both eyes will look to the right.
In the brain stem, the abducens nucleus (CN VI) and the oculomotor nucleus
(CN III) are situated close to the midline just beneath the fourth ventricle or the
cerebral aqueduct, in the pons and midbrain. These nuclei are interconnected by
the fibers in the MLF. It is the fibers in the MLF that permit conjugate gaze, either
when the target moves or when the head moves, through their interconnections to
gaze centers and the vestibular system.
Control of Horizontal Gaze
Horizontal gaze is controlled by 2 interconnected gaze centers. One control center
is in the frontal lobe, the frontal eye field (Brodmann area 8). This area acts as a
center for contralateral horizontal gaze. In the pons is a second gaze center,
known as the pontine gaze center or the PPRF, the paramedian pontine reticular
formation. This is a center for ipsilateral horizontal gaze. When activated by
neurons in the frontal eye field, the pontine gaze center neurons send axons to
synapse with cell bodies in the abducens nucleus, which is actually contained
within the pontine gaze center. The pontine gaze center also sends axons that cross
immediately and course in the contralateral MLF to reach the contralateral
oculomotor nucleus. The net effect of stimulation of the left frontal eye field,
therefore, is activation of the pontine gaze center on the right and a saccadic
horizontal eye movement of both eyes to the right. Horizontal gaze to the right
results from activation of the right abducens nucleus and the left oculomotor
nucleus by fibers in the MLF.
Lesions in the MLF result in an internuclear ophthalmoplegia in which there is an
inability to adduct one eye on attempted gaze to the opposite side. For example, a
lesion in the right MLF results in an inability to adduct the right eye on an
attempted gaze to the left. The left eye abducts normally but exhibits a nystagmus.
If the MLF is lesioned bilaterally (as might be the case in multiple sclerosis),
neither eye adducts on attempted gaze (Figures III 5 13 and III 5 14), and the
abducting eye exhibits a nystagmus.
29
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Lesion sites are indicated
Right Left
by 1–4.
Cerebral cortex frontal
Paramedian pontine
Pharmacology Biochemistry eye fields (Area 8)
reticular formation (PPRF)
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Abducens
nucleus Medial longitudinal
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences fasciculus (MLF) L
in
Oculomotor
nucleus
Microbiology
Right lateral Left medial
rectus muscle rectus muscle
Abducts Adducts
Right eye Left eye
Figure III 5 13. Voluntary Horizontal Conjugate Gaze
Figure III 5 13. Voluntary Horizontal Conjugate Gaze
Table III 5 2. Clinical Correlate
Lesion Examples Symptoms
1. Right CN VI Right eye cannot look right
2. Right PPRF Neither eye can look right
3. Left MLF Internuclear ophthalmoplegia (INO)
Left eye cannot look right; convergence is
intact (this is how to distinguish an INO from
an oculomotor lesion); right eye has nystag
mus; seen in multiple sclerosis
4. Left frontal eye field Neither eye can look right; but slow drift to left
Abbreviations: MLF, medial longitudinal fasciculus; PPRF, paramedian pontine reticular
formation
29
CHAPTER 5 | THE BRAIN STEM
Ask patient to look to the right—response shown below CLINICAL CORRELATE
Normal The abducens nucleus is coexistent
with the PPRF, the center for ipsilateral
horizontal gaze. Lesions result in an
inability to look to the lesion side, and
RL
may include a complete ipsilateral facial
paralysis because the VIIth nerve fibers
ABDUCT ADDUCT
loop over the CN VI nucleus.
1
2
Figure III 5 14. Normal and Abnormal Horizontal Gaze
Figure III 5 14. Normal and Abnormal Horizontal Gaze
Table III 5 3. Normal/Abnormal Responses to Horizontal Conjugate Gaze: Part 1
Lesion Location Symptoms (Results)
Right Abducens nerve, #1 Right eye cannot look right (abduct)
Right Abducens nucleus, #2 Neither eye can look right (lateral gaze
paralysis)—may be slow drift left and
complete right facial paralysis
29
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Ask patient to look to the right—response shown below
Normal
Pharmacology Biochemistry
RL
Physiology MedicalGenetics 3
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
4
Microbiology
Figure III 5 15. Normal and Abnormal Horizontal Gaze
Figure III 5 15. Normal and Abnormal Horizontal Gaze
Table III 5 4. Normal/Abnormal Responses to Horizontal Gaze: Part 2
Lesion Location Symptoms (Results)
Left MLF, #3 Left eye cannot look right; conver
gence intact; right eye exhibits
Internuclear ophthalmoplegia
nystagmus
Left cerebral cortex, #4 Neither eye can look right: but slow
drift to left; may be seen with right
lower face weakness and right
upper limb weakness
Abbreviation: MLF, medial longitudinal fasciculus
BLOOD SUPPLY TO THE BRAIN STEM
Vertebral Artery
This artery is a branch of the subclavian that ascends through the foramina of the
transverse processes of the upper 6 cervical vertebrae. It enters the posterior fossa
by passing through the foramen magnum. The vertebral arteries continue up the
ventral surface of the medulla and, at the caudal border of the pons, join to form
the basilar artery.
Branches of the vertebral artery include:
• Anterior spinal artery, which supplies the ventrolateral two thirds of the
cervical spinal cord and the ventromedial part of the medulla
• Posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA), which supplies the cerebellum
and the dorsolateral part of the medulla
30
CHAPTER 5 | THE BRAIN STEM
Circle of Willis
Anterior
communicating
Anterior cerebral
Internal carotid
Middle
cerebral Posterior
communicating
Superior Posterior cerebral
cerebellar (medial midbrain)
(lateral pons)
Paramedian (medial pons)
Basilar
Anterior inferior cerebellar
Vertebral
(lateral pons)
Anterior spinal
(medial medulla) Posterior inferior cerebellar
(lateral medulla)
Figure III 5 16. Arterial Supply of the Brain
Figure III 5 16. Arterial Supply of the Brain
Basilar Artery
The basilar artery is formed by the joining of the 2 vertebral arteries at the ponto
medullary junction. It ascends along the ventral midline of the pons and termi
nates near the rostral border of the pons by dividing into the 2 posterior cerebral
arteries. Branches include the anterior inferior cerebellar arteries (AICA) and the
paramedian arteries.
Branches of the basilar artery include:
• Labyrinthine artery, which follows the course of the eighth cranial nerve
and supplies the inner ear
• Anterior inferior cerebellar artery, which supplies part of the pons and the
anterior and inferior regions of the cerebellum
• Superior cerebellar artery, which supplies part of the rostral pons and the
superior region of the cerebellum
• Pontine branches, which supply much of the pons via paramedian and
circumferential vessels
At the rostral end of the midbrain, the basilar artery divides into a pair of posterior
cerebral arteries. Paramedian and circumferential branches of the posterior
cerebral artery supply the midbrain.
30
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
BRAIN STEM LESIONS
There are 2 keys to localizing brain stem lesions. First, it is uncommon to injure
parts of the brain stem without involving one or more cranial nerves. The cranial
nerve signs will localize the lesion to the midbrain (CN III or IV), upper pons (CN
Pharmacology Biochemistry
V), lower pons (CN VI, VII, or VIII), or upper medulla (CN IX, X, or XII).
Second, if the lesion is in the brain stem, the cranial nerve deficits will be seen with
a lesion to one or more of the descending or ascending long tracts (corticospinal,
medial lemniscus, spinothalamic, descending hypothalamic fibers). Lesions in the
Physiology MedicalGenetics brain stem to any of the long tracts except for the descending hypothalamic fibers
will result in a contralateral deficit. A unilateral lesion to the descending hypotha
lamic fibers that results in Horner syndrome is always seen ipsilateral to the side of
the lesion.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Medial Medullary Syndrome
Medial medullary syndrome is most frequently the result of occlusion of the
vertebral artery or the anterior spinal artery (Figure III 5 17). Medial medullary
Microbiology
syndrome presents with a lesion of the hypoglossal nerve as the cranial nerve sign
and lesions to both the medial lemniscus and the corticospinal tract. Corticospinal
tract lesions produce contralateral spastic hemiparesis of both limbs.
Medial lemniscus lesions produce a contralateral deficit of proprioception and
touch, pressure, and vibratory sensations in the limbs and body.
Lesions of the hypoglossal nerve in the medulla produce an ipsilateral paralysis of
half the tongue with atrophy. Upon protrusion, the tongue deviates toward the side
of the lesion.
Medulla
Nucleus of solitary tract
Vestibular nuclei
Dorsal motor nucleus of CN X
Inferior cerebellar
Hypoglossal nucleus
peduncle
Spinal trigeminal B
tract and nucleus
CNs IX, X
Nucleus ambiguus
Descending hypo and
spino thalamic tracts
Inferior olivary nucleus
CN XII
A
Medial lemniscus Pyramid
Figure III 5 17. Medulla Lesions
Figure III 5 17. Medulla Lesions
30
CHAPTER 5 | THE BRAIN STEM
Medial Medullary Syndrome A
Anterior Spinal Artery
• Pyramid: contralateral spastic paresis
• Medial lemniscus: contralateral loss of tactile, vibration, conscious
proprioception
• XII nucleus/fibers: ipsilateral flaccid paralysis of tongue with tongue
deviation on protrusion to lesion side.
Lateral Medullary Syndrome B
PICA, Wallenberg Syndrome
• Inferior cerebellar peduncle: ipsilateral limb ataxia
• Vestibular nuclei: vertigo, nausea/vomiting, nystagmus (away from lesion)
• Nucleus ambiguus (CN IX, X): ipsilateral paralysis of larynx, pharynx,
palate → dysarthria, dysphagia, loss of gag reflex
• Spinal V: ipsilateral pain/temperature loss (face)
• Spinothalamic tract: Contralateral pain/temperature loss (body)
• Descending hypothalamics: ipsilateral Horner syndrome
Lateral Medullary (Wallenberg) Syndrome
Lateral medullary syndrome results from occlusion of the PICA. The cranial nerves
or nuclei involved in the lesion are the vestibular or the cochlear parts of CN VIII,
the glossopharyngeal and the vagus nerves, and the spinal nucleus or tract of V.
The long tracts involved are the spinothalamic tract and the descending hypotha
lamic fibers.
Spinothalamic tract lesions produce a pain and temperature sensation deficit in
the contralateral limbs and body.
Lesions of descending hypothalamic fibers produce an ipsilateral Horner syn
drome (i.e., miosis, ptosis, and anhidrosis).
Lesions of the vestibular nuclei and pathways may produce nystagmus, vertigo,
nausea, and vomiting. If there is a vestibular nystagmus, the fast component will
be away from the side of the lesion.
Lesions of the vagus nerves exiting the medulla may produce dysphagia (difficulty
in swallowing) or hoarseness. The palate will droop on the affected side, and the
uvula will deviate away from the side of the lesion.
Lesions of the glossopharyngeal nerve result in a diminished or absent gag reflex.
Lesions of the spinal tract and nucleus of the trigeminal nerve produce a loss of
just pain and temperature sensations on the ipsilateral side of half the face. Touch
sensations from the face and the corneal blink reflex will be intact. In lateral
medullary syndrome, the pain and temperature losses are alternating; these
sensations are lost from the face and scalp ipsilateral to the lesion but are lost from
the contralateral limbs and trunk.
Taste sensations may be altered if the solitary nucleus is involved.
30
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Medial Pontine Syndrome
Medial pontine syndrome results from occlusion of paramedian branches of the
basilar artery. At a minimum, this lesion affects the exiting fibers of the abducens
nerve and the corticospinal tract. The medial lemniscus may be affected if the
Pharmacology Biochemistry
lesion is deeper into the pons, and the facial nerve may be affected if the lesion
extends laterally.
The long tract signs will be the same as in medial medullary syndrome, involving
Physiology MedicalGenetics the corticospinal and medial lemniscus, but the abducens nerve and the facial
nerve lesions localize the lesion to the caudal pons.
Corticospinal tract lesions produce contralateral spastic hemiparesis of both limbs.
Medial lemniscus lesions produce a contralateral deficit of proprioception and
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
touch, pressure, and vibratory sensations in the limbs and body.
Lesions of the abducens nerve exiting the caudal pons produce an internal
strabismus of the ipsilateral eye (from paralysis of the lateral rectus). This results in
Microbiology diplopia on attempted lateral gaze to the affected side.
Lesions of the facial nerve exiting the caudal pons produce complete weakness of
the muscles of facial expression on the side of the lesion.
Lesions of the facial nerve may also include an alteration of taste from the anterior
two thirds of the tongue, loss of lacrimation (eye dry and red), and loss of the
motor limb of the corneal blink reflex.
If a lesion extends dorsally to include the abducens nucleus (which includes the
horizontal gaze center in the PPRF), there may be a lateral gaze paralysis in which
both eyes are forcefully directed to the side contralateral to the lesion.
Lateral Pontine Syndrome
Lesions of the dorsolateral pons usually result from occlusion of the anterior
inferior cerebellar artery (caudal pons) or superior cerebellar artery (rostral pons).
The long tracts involved will be the same as in lateral medullary syndrome, the
spinothalamic tract and the descending hypothalamic fibers. The cranial nerves
involved will be the facial and vestibulocochlear in the caudal pons, the trigeminal
nerve in the rostral pons, and the spinal nucleus and tract of V in both lesions.
Spinothalamic tract lesions produce a pain and temperature sensation deficit in
the contralateral limbs and body.
Lesions of descending hypothalamic fibers produce an ipsilateral Horner syn
drome (i.e., miosis, ptosis, and anhidrosis).
Lesions of the vestibular nuclei and pathways (caudal pons) produce nystagmus,
vertigo, nausea, and vomiting. Again, the fast phase of the nystagmus will be away
from the side of the lesion. Lesions of the cochlear nucleus or auditory nerve
produce an ipsilateral sensorineural hearing loss.
Lesions of the spinal tract and nucleus of the trigeminal nerve result only in a loss
of pain and temperature sensations on the ipsilateral side of half the face.
30
CHAPTER 5 | THE BRAIN STEM
Lesions of the facial nerve and associated structures produce ipsilateral facial
paralysis, loss of taste from the anterior two thirds of the tongue, loss of lacrima
tion and salivation, and loss of the corneal reflex.
Lesions of the trigeminal nerve (rostral pons) result in complete anesthesia of the
face on the side of the lesion, weakness of muscles of mastication, and deviation of
the jaw toward the lesioned side.
Pons
Vestibular nuclei Abducent nucleus
MLF
Inferior cerebellar
peduncle
Spinal trigeminal
nucleus and tract
B
CN VIII
(vestibular nerve)
CN VII
Nucleus CN VII
Medial lemniscus
Lateral
spinothalamic tract Corticospinal tract
CN VI
A
Figure Figure IIIIII55181.8. PPoonnss
Medial Pontine Syndrome (A)
Paramedian Branches of Basilar Artery
• Corticospinal tract: contralateral spastic hemiparesis
• Medial lemniscus: contralateral loss of tactile/position/vibration sensation
• Fibers of VI: medial strabismus
Lateral Pontine Syndrome (B)
AICA
• Middle cerebellar peduncle: ipsilateral ataxia
• Vestibular nuclei: vertigo, nausea and vomiting, nystagmus
• Facial nucleus and fibers: ipsilateral facial paralysis; ipsilateral loss of
taste (anterior two thirds of tongue), lacrimation, salivation, and corneal
reflex; hyperacusis
• Spinal trigeminal nucleus/tract: ipsilateral pain/temperature loss (face)
• Spinothalamic tract: contralateral pain/temperature loss (body)
• Cochlear nucleus/VIII fibers: ipsilateral hearing loss
• Descending hypothalamics: ipsilateral Horner syndrome
30
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Pontocerebellar Angle Syndrome
Pontocerebellar angle syndrome is usually caused by an acoustic neuroma
(schwannoma) of CN VIII. This is a slow growing tumor, which originates from
Schwann cells in the vestibular nerve (or less commonly the auditory nerve). As
Pharmacology Biochemistry
the tumor grows, it exerts pressure on the lateral part of the caudal pons where CN
VII emerges and may expand anteriorly to compress the fifth nerve. The cranial
nerve deficits seen together localize the lesion to the brain stem, but the absence of
long tract signs indicates that the lesion must be outside of the brain stem.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Medial Midbrain (Weber) Syndrome
Medial midbrain (Weber) syndrome results from occlusion of branches of the
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences posterior cerebral artery. Exiting fibers of CN III are affected, along with corti
cobulbar and corticospinal fibers in the medial aspect of the cerebral peduncle.
Third nerve lesions result in a ptosis, mydriasis (dilated pupil), and an external
strabismus. As with any brain stem lesion affecting CN III, accommodation and
convergence will also be affected. Corticospinal tract lesions produce contralateral
Microbiology spastic hemiparesis of both limbs. The involvement of the cortico bulbar fibers
results in a contralateral lower face weakness seen as a drooping of the corner of
the mouth. The patient will be able to shut the eye (blink reflex is intact) and
wrinkle the forehead.
Midbrain
Posterior commissure and center
for vertical conjugate gaze
A Superior colliculus
Nucleus of CN III
Medial geniculate body
Spinothalamic tract
Substantia nigra Medial lemniscus
Red nucleus
Corticospinal tract
B
Corticobulbar tract
CN III
FigureFigure IIIIII 55 1199.. MMidibdrbarianin
Dorsal Midbrain (Parinaud) Syndrome (A)
Tumor in Pineal Region
• Superior colliculus/pretectal area: paralysis of upward gaze, various
pupillary abnormalities
• Cerebral aqueduct: noncommunicating hydrocephalus
30
CHAPTER 5 | THE BRAIN STEM
Medial Midbrain (Weber) Syndrome (B)
Branches of PCA
• Fibers of III: ipsilateral oculomotor palsy (lateral strabismus, dilated
pupil, ptosis)
• Corticospinal tract: contralateral spastic hemiparesis
• Corticobulbar tract: contralateral hemiparesis of lower face
Cortex or Capsular Lesions Brain stem Lesions Spinal Cord Hemisection
Dorsal
columns (DC)
Corticospinal
tract (CST)
Spinothalamic
tract (SpTh)
Complete All long tract CN signs Two signs One sign
anesthesia signs produce ipsilateral ipsilateral and contralateral
and lower contralateral to lesion below lesion and below
face weakness deficits lesion
contralateral except for
ipsilateral
Horner’s
syndrome
• Spastic • Loss of
weakness pain and
• Altered temperature
vibratory
sense
No CN signs
All sensory system lesions from Long tract findings: All give rise to Long tract findings: NOT ALL on
face or body produce contralateral deficits. one side; loss of pain and
contralateral deficits. temperature (P&T) separate from
Lesion is at brain stem: at level of others.
Lesion of corticobulbar fibers cranial nerve affected and on
produces contralateral lower face same side as cranial nerve Lesion is at spinal cord level on
weakness. findings. side opposite P&T loss.
Figure III 5 20. Strategy for the Study of Lesions
Figure III 5 20. Strategy for the Study of Lesions
30
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Parinaud Syndrome
Parinaud syndrome usually occurs as a result of a pineal tumor compressing the
superior colliculi. The most common sign is paralysis of upward or vertical gaze,
combined with bilateral pupillary abnormalities (e.g., slightly dilated pupils, which
Pharmacology Biochemistry
may show an impaired light or accommodation reaction) and signs of elevated
intracranial pressure. Compression of the cerebral aqueduct can result in noncom
municating hydrocephalus.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
RETICULAR FORMATION
The reticular formation is located in the brain stem and functions to coordinate
and integrate the actions of different parts of the CNS. It plays an important role in
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
the regulation of muscle and reflex activity and control of respiration, cardiovascu
lar responses, behavioral arousal, and sleep.
MicrobioloCgyLINICAL CORRELATE Reticular Nuclei
Neurons in both the raphe and locus coeru The raphe nuclei are a narrow column of cells in the midline of the brain stem,
leus degenerate in Alzheimer disease. extending from the medulla to the midbrain. Cells in some of the raphe nuclei
(e.g., the dorsal raphe nucleus) synthesize serotonin (5 hydroxytryptamine
[5 HT]) from l tryptophan and project to vast areas of the CNS. They play a role
in mood, aggression, and the induction of non–rapid eye movement (non REM)
sleep.
Cells in the locus coeruleus synthesize norepinephrine and send projections to
most brain areas involved in the control of cortical activation (arousal). Decreased
levels of norepinephrine are evident in REM (paradoxic) sleep.
The periaqueductal (central) gray is a collection of nuclei surrounding the
cerebral aqueduct in the midbrain. Opioid receptors are present on many periaq
ueductal gray cells, the projections from which descend to modulate pain at the
level of the dorsal horn of the spinal cord.
30
6#
The Cerebellum
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Use knowledge of cerebellar cytoarchitecture
❏ Solve problems concerning circuitry
GENERAL FEATURES
The cerebellum, located dorsal to the pons and the medulla, is derived from the
metencephalon. The fourth ventricle is found between the cerebellum and the
dorsal aspect of the pons. The cerebellum functions in the planning and fine
tuning of skeletal muscle contractions; it performs these tasks by comparing an
intended with an actual performance.
The cerebellum consists of a midline vermis and 2 lateral cerebellar hemispheres.
The cerebellar cortex consists of multiple parallel folds (or folia) and contains
several maps of the skeletal muscles in the body. The topographic arrangement of
these maps indicates that the vermis controls the axial and proximal musculature
of the limbs, the intermediate part of the hemisphere controls distal musculature,
and the lateral part of the hemisphere is involved in motor planning.
The flocculonodular lobe is involved in control of balance and eye movements.
Vermis Intermediate hemisphere
Lateral hemisphere
Superior
vermis
Cerebellar
peduncle Anterior lobe
Flocculonodular lobe
Posterior lobe
Inferior
vermis
Figure FigurIeII 6III1.6 C1.ereCbeelrleubmellum
30
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Table III 6 1. Cerebellum
Region Function Principle Input
Vermis and intermedi Ongoing motor Spinal cord
Pharmacology Biochemistry ate zones execution
Hemisphere (lateral) Planning/coordination Cerebral cortex and
inferior olivary
nucleus
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Flocculonodular lobe Balance and eye Vestibular nuclei
movements (VIII)
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Major input to the cerebellum travels in the inferior cerebellar peduncle (ICP)
(restiform body) and middle cerebellar peduncle (MCP). Major outflow from the
cerebellum travels in the superior cerebellar peduncle (SCP).
Microbiology
Cerebellar Cytoarchitecture
All afferent and efferent projections of the cerebellum traverse the ICP, MCP, or
SCP. Most afferent input enters the cerebellum in the ICP and MCP; most efferent
outflow leaves in the SCP.
Table III 6 2. Major Afferents to the Cerebellum
Name Tract Enter Cerebellum Target and
Via Function
Mossy Vestibulocerebellar ICP Excitatory
fibers terminals on
Spinocerebellar ICP and SCP
granule cells
(Cortico)
MCP (decussate)
(glutamate)
pontocerebellar
Climbing Olivocerebellar ICP (decussate) Excitatory
fibers terminals on
Purkinje cells
Abbreviations: ICP, inferior cerebellar peduncle; MCP, middle cerebellar peduncle; SCP,
superior cerebellar peduncle
Internally, the cerebellum consists of an outer cortex and an internal white matter
(medullary substance).
The cortex has 3 cell layers:
• Molecular layer (outer layer) includes basket and stellate cells, plus parallel
fibers (the axons of the granule cells). The extensive dendritic tree of the
Purkinje cell extends into the molecular layer.
• Purkinje layer (middle layer) is the most important layer of the cerebellar
cortex. All of the inputs to the cerebellum are directed toward influenc
ing the firing of Purkinje cells, and only axons of Purkinje cells leave the
cerebellar cortex. A single axon exits from each Purkinje cell and
projects to one of the deep cerebellar nuclei or to vestibular nuclei of the
brain stem.
31
CHAPTER 6 | THE CEREBELLUM
• Granule cell layer (innermost layer) contains Golgi cells, granule cells, and
glomeruli. Each glomerulus is surrounded by a glial capsule and contains
a granule cell and axons of Golgi cells, which synapse with granule cells.
The granule cell is the only excitatory neuron within the cerebellar cortex.
All other neurons in the cerebellar cortex–including Purkinje, Golgi,
basket, and stellate cells–are inhibitory.
Table III 6 3. Cerebellum: Cell Types
Name Target (Axon Termination) Transmitter Function
Purkinje cell Deep cerebellar nuclei GABA Inhibitory*
Granule cell Purkinje cell Glutamate Excitatory
Stellate cell Purkinje cell GABA Inhibitory
Basket cell Purkinje cell GABA Inhibitory
Golgi cell Granule cell GABA Inhibitory
*Purkinje cells are the only outflow from the cerebellar cortex.
The internal white matter contains the deep cerebellar nuclei.
31
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Paravermal Vermal
Anterior lobe
Posterior lobe Primary fissure
Flocculonodular lobe
Pharmacology Biochemistry Anterior
Hemisphere
(lateral)
Posterior
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Dentate Posterolateral fissure
nucleus
Flocculus
Nodulus
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Emboliform
GC: Golgi cell
nucleus Fastigial Purkinje cell axons
Globose nucleus
BC: Basket cell
nucleus
Microbiology Interposed nuclei GrC: Granule cel
A
Parallel fiber
Molecular
Cerebellar
+ + + + layer
cortex
BC
Purkinje
GC
cell layer
PC
Climbing
fiber (from – GrC + Granule
–
olivary nuclei) + cell layer
–
Deep CB +
nuclei + Mossy fiber (from spinal
cord, pontine nuclei, or
vestibular nuclei)
B +
Figure III 6 2. Cerebellar Organization
(A) Parts of the cerebellar cortex andFigurethe IIIdee6p 2. Cceerreebbeellllaarr Organinzuactiloein linked together by Purkinje cells
(B) Topographic arrangement of skeletal muscles controlled by parts of the cerebellum
(A) Parts of the cerebellar cortex and the deep cerebellar nuclei linked together by Purkinje cells
(C) Cytology of the cerebellar cortex
(B) Topographic arrangement of skeletal muscles controlled by parts of the cerebellum
(C) Cytology of the cerebellar cortex
From medial to lateral, the deep cerebellar nuclei in the internal white matter are
the fastigial nucleus, interposed nuclei, and dentate nucleus.
Two kinds of excitatory input enter the cerebellum in the form of climbing fibers
and mossy fibers. Both types influence the firing of deep cerebellar nuclei by axon
collaterals.
Climbing fibers originate exclusively from the inferior olivary complex of nuclei
on the contralateral side of the medulla. Climbing fibers provide a direct powerful
monosynaptic excitatory input to Purkinje cells.
Mossy fibers represent the axons from all other sources of cerebellar input. Mossy
fibers provide an indirect, more diffuse excitatory input to Purkinje cells.
312
CHAPTER 6 | THE CEREBELLUM
All mossy fibers exert an excitatory effect on granule cells. Each granule cell
sends its axon into the molecular layer, where it gives off collaterals at a 90 degree
angle that run parallel to the cortical surface (i.e., parallel fibers). These granule
cell axons stimulate the apical dendrites of the Purkinje cells. Golgi cells receive
excitatory input from mossy fibers and from the parallel fibers of the granule
cells. The Golgi cell in turn inhibits the granule cell, which activated it in the first
place.
The basket and stellate cells, which also receive excitatory input from parallel
fibers of granule cells, inhibit Purkinje cells.
Circuitry
The basic cerebellar circuits begin with Purkinje cells that receive excitatory input
directly from climbing fibers and from parallel fibers of granule cells.
Purkinje cell axons project to and inhibit the deep cerebellar nuclei or the vestibu
lar nuclei in an orderly fashion.
• Purkinje cells in the flocculonodular lobe project to the lateral vestibular
nucleus.
• Purkinje cells in the vermis project to the fastigial nuclei.
• Purkinje cells in the intermediate hemisphere primarily project to the
interposed (globose and emboliform) nuclei.
• Purkinje cells in the lateral cerebellar hemisphere project to the dentate
nucleus.
Dysfunction
• Hemisphere lesions → ipsilateral symptoms: intention tremor, dysmetria,
dysdiadochokinesia, scanning dysarthria, nystagmus, hypotonia
• Vermal lesions → truncal ataxia
Major Pathway
Purkinje cells → deep cerebellar nucleus; dentate nucleus → contralateral VL →
first degree motor cortex → pontine nuclei → contralateral cerebellar cortex
31
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Precentral
gyrus
Upper motor Net effect:
neurons Right side of Cb
controls muscles
Pharmacology Biochemistry
on right side of
the body
Physiology MedicalGenetics
VL/VA
(thalamus)
Red nucleus
(midbrain)
Fastigial
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences nucleus
Superior Cb
peduncle
Interpositus
nucleus
Microbiology
Dentate
nucleus Purkinje cell
axons
Lateral
hemisphere
Paravermal
Vermis
hemisphere
Left Right
Rubrospinal tract
Corticospinal tract
Figure FigIuIrIe 6 II3I. 6C3er.ebCelelarerbellar EfEffefreernetnsts
Table III 6 4. Major Efferents From the Cerebellum
Cerebellar Areas Deep Efferents to: Function
Cerebellar
Nucleus
Vestibulocerebellum Fastigial Vestibular Elicit positional changes of eyes and trunk in
(flocculonodular nucleus nucleus response to movement of the head
lobe)
Spinocerebellum Interpositus Red nucleus Influence LMNs via the reticulospinal and
(intermediate nucleus rubrospinal tracts to adjust posture and effect
Reticular
hemisphere) movement
formation
Pontocerebellum Dentate Thalamus (VA, Influence on LMNs via the corticospinal tract,
(lateral hemispheres) nucleus VL) then cortex which effect voluntary movements, especially
sequence and precision
31
CHAPTER 6 | THE CEREBELLUM
Efferents from the deep cerebellar nuclei leave mainly through the SCP and
influence all upper motoneurons. In particular, axons from the dentate and
interposed nuclei leave through the SCP, cross the midline, and terminate in the
ventrolateral (VL) nucleus of the thalamus.
The VL nucleus of the thalamus projects to primary motor cortex and influences
the firing of corticospinal and corticobulbar neurons.
Axons from other deep cerebellar nuclei influence upper motoneurons in the red
nucleus and in the reticular formation and vestibular nuclei.
Cerebellar Lesions
CLINICAL CORRELATE
The hallmark of cerebellar dysfunction is a tremor with intended movement
Anterior vermis lesions are usually the result
without paralysis or paresis. Symptoms associated with cerebellar lesions are
expressed ipsilaterally because the major outflow of the cerebellum projects to the of degeneration from alcohol abuse and are
contralateral motor cortex, and then the corticospinal fibers cross on their way to present with gait ataxia. Posterior vermis
the spinal cord. Thus, unilateral lesions of the cerebellum will result in a patient lesions result from medulloblastomas or
falling toward the side of the lesion.
ependymomas and present with truncal
ataxia
Lesions that include the hemisphere
Lesions that include the hemisphere produce a number of dysfunctions, mostly
involving distal musculature.
An intention tremor is seen when voluntary movements are performed. For
example, if a patient with a cerebellar lesion is asked to pick up a penny, a slight
tremor of the fingers is evident and increases as the penny is approached. The
tremor is barely noticeable or is absent at rest.
Dysmetria (past pointing) is the inability to stop a movement at the proper place.
The patient has difficulty performing the finger to nose test.
Dysdiadochokinesia (adiadochokinesia) is the reduced ability to perform
alternating movements, such as pronation and supination of the forearm, at a
moderately quick pace.
Scanning dysarthria is caused by asynergy of the muscles responsible for speech.
In scanning dysarthria, patients divide words into syllables, thereby disrupting the
melody of speech.
Gaze dysfunction occurs when the eyes try to fix on a point: They may pass it or
stop too soon and then oscillate a few times before they settle on the target. A
nystagmus may be present, particularly with acute cerebellar damage. The nystag
mus is often coarse, with the fast component usually directed toward the involved
cerebellar hemisphere.
Hypotonia usually occurs with an acute cerebellar insult that includes the deep
cerebellar nuclei. The muscles feel flabby on palpation, and deep tendon reflexes
are usually diminished.
Lesions to the vermal region
Vermal lesions result in difficulty maintaining posture, gait, or balance (an ataxic
gait). Patients with vermal damage may be differentiated from those with a lesion
of the dorsal columns by the Romberg sign. In cerebellar lesions, patients will sway
or lose their balance with their eyes open; in dorsal column lesions, patients sway
with their eyes closed.
315

7#
Basal Ganglia
LEARNING OBJECTIVE
❏ Solve problems concerning general features of the basal ganglia
GENERAL FEATURES
The basal ganglia initiate and provide gross control over skeletal muscle move
ments. The major components of the basal ganglia include:
• Striatum, which consists of the caudate nucleus and the putamen (telen
cephalon)
• External and internal segments of the globus pallidus (telencephalon)
• Substantia nigra (in midbrain)
• Subthalamic nucleus (in diencephalon)
Together with the cerebral cortex and the ventrolateral (VL) nucleus of the
thalamus, these structures are interconnected to form 2 parallel but antagonistic
circuits known as the direct and indirect basal ganglia pathways. Both pathways
are driven by extensive inputs from large areas of cerebral cortex, and both project
back to the motor cortex after a relay in the VL nucleus of the thalamus. Both
pathways use a process known as “disinhibition” to mediate their effects, whereby
one population of inhibitory neurons inhibits a second population of inhibitory
neurons.
Direct Basal Ganglia Pathway
In the direct pathway, excitatory input from the cerebral cortex projects to striatal
neurons in the caudate nucleus and putamen. Through disinhibition, activated
inhibitory neurons in the striatum, which use γ aminobutyric acid (GABA) as
their neurotransmitter, project to and inhibit additional GABA neurons in the
internal segment of the globus pallidus.
The GABA axons of the internal segment of the globus pallidus project to the
thalamus (VL). Because their input to the thalamus is disinhibited, the thalamic
input excites the motor cortex. The net effect of the disinhibition in the direct
pathway results in an increased level of cortical excitation and the promotion of
movement.
31
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Indirect Basal Ganglia Pathway
In the indirect pathway, excitatory input from the cerebral cortex also projects to
striatal neurons in the caudate nucleus and putamen. These inhibitory neurons in
the striatum, which also use GABA as their neurotransmitter, project to and
Pharmacology Biochemistry
inhibit additional GABA neurons in the external segment of the globus pallidus.
The GABA axons of the external segment of the globus pallidus project to the
subthalamic nucleus. Through disinhibition, the subthalamic nucleus excites
Physiology MedicalGenetics inhibitory GABA neurons in the internal segment of the globus pallidus, which
inhibits the thalamus. This decreases the level of cortical excitation, inhibiting
movement. The net effect of the disinhibition in the indirect pathway results in a
decreased level of cortical excitation, and a suppression of unwanted movement.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Plane of section
Microbiology
Corpus callosum
Lateral ventricle
Caudate nucleus
Internal capsule:
Anterior limb Putamen
Genu Globus pallidus
Posterior limb Thalamus
Third ventricle
Figure III 7 1. HorizontaFligure or AxiaIIlI S7ecti1o.n through Basal Ganglia
31
CHAPTER 7 | BASAL GANGLIA
NOTE
Cortex
Both basal ganglia pathways utilize 2 GABA
Glutamate neurons in series, and a “disinhibition.”
Indirect
Input center
Globus pallidus GABA/Enkephalin Striatum
external segment (acetylcholine) NOTE
Dopamine
GABA/ Dopamine drives the direct pathway;
GABA Direct Substance P acetylcholine (ACh) drives the indirect
Substantia nigra pathway.
pars compacta
Subthalamic Globus pallidus Substantia nigra
nucleus Glutamate internal segment pars reticulata
Output center GABA
Thalamus Ventral anterior/
ventral lateral
thalamic nuclei
Clear arrows: excitatory Supplementary
Shaded arrows: inhibitory motor area
Figure III F7igur2e. Basal IIIGan7glia2. Pathways
Dopamine and cholinergic effects
In addition to the GABA neurons, 2 other sources of chemically significant
neurons enhance the effects of the direct or indirect pathways.
Dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra in the midbrain project to the
striatum. The effect of dopamine excites or drives the direct pathway, increasing
cortical excitation. Dopamine excites the direct pathway through D1 receptors and
inhibits the indirect pathway through D2 receptors.
Cholinergic neurons found within the striatum have the opposite effect. Acetyl
choline (Ach) drives the indirect pathway, decreasing cortical excitation.
31
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Pharmacology Biochemistry
NOTE
PhysiologyAll basal ganglia connections MeadriecalGwenitehtics
ipsilateral cortex.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Microbiology
Figure III 7 3. MRI of Horizontal Section through
Figure III 7 3. MRI of Horizontal Section through Diencephalon,
Diencephalon, Basal Ganglia, and Cortex.
Basal Ganglia, and Cortex
(a) Thalamus (b) Head of Caudate Nucleus (c) Genu of Internal
(a) Thalamus (b) Head of Caudate Nucleus (c) Genu of Internal Capsule Containing Corticobulbar
Capsule Containing Corticobulbar Axons (d) Posterior Limb of
Axons (d) Posterior Limb of Internal Capsule (e) Primary Visual Cortex (f) Splenium of Corpus Callosum
Internal Capsule (e) Primary Visual Cortex (f) Splenium of Corpus
(g) Putamen (h) Broca’s Motor Speech Area (i) Wernicke’s Oral Comprehension Area
Callosum (g) Putamen (h) Broca’s Motor Speech Area
(i) Wernicke’s Oral Comprehension Area
32
CHAPTER 7 | BASAL GANGLIA
A
L
G
B
F
C E
H
D
K J
I
Figure FiIgIIure7 4I.II 7Cor4o.naCloronal SeSceticotinon throthurgohugh Basal BaGsaalnglia GaanndgliaOther aSnudbcorticaOlther StruScutubrceosrtical Structures
(A) caudate nucleus (B) putamen (C) globus pallidus external segment (D) globus
(A) caudate nucleus (B) putamen (C) globus pallidus external segment
pallidus internal segment (E) septal nuclei (F) fornix (G) lateral ventricle (H) anterior commissure
(D) globus pallidus internal segment (E) septal nuclei (F) fornix (G) lateral
(I) optic chiasm (J) basal nucleus of Meynert (K) preoptic hypothalamus
ventricle (H) anterior commissure (I) optic chiasm (J) basal nucleus of
(L) internal capsule, anterior limb
Meynert (K) preoptic hypothalamus (L) internal capsule, anterior limb
32
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Table III 7 1. Diseases of the Basal Ganglia
Disease Clinical Manifestations Notes
Parkinson Bradykinesia, cogwheel rigidity, Loss of pigmented dopaminergic neurons from
Pharmacologydisease pill Broilolicnhgemistry (resting) tremor, shuffling substantia nigra
gate, stooped posture, masked face,
Lewy bodies: intracytoplasmic eosinophilic inclu
depression, dementia
sions, contain α synuclein
Known causes of parkinsonism: infections, vascular,
Physiology MedicalGenetics and toxic insults (e.g., MPTP)
Disease Clinical Manifestations Notes
Huntington Chorea (multiple, rapid, random Degeneration of GABAergic neurons in neostriatum,
disease movements), athetosis (slow, causing atrophy of head of caudate nucleus (and
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
writhing movements), personality ventricular dilatation)
changes, dementia
Autosomal dominant
Onset: 20−40 years
Unstable nucleotide repeat on gene in chromosome
4, which codes for huntingtin protein
Microbiology
Disease shows anticipation and genomic imprinting
Treatment: antipsychotic agents, benzodiazepines,
anticonvulsants
Wilson disease Tremor, asterixis, parkinsonian Autosomal recessive defect in copper transport
(hepatolenticu symptoms, chorea, neuropsychiatric
Accumulation of copper in liver, brain, and eye
lar degenera symptoms; fatty change, hepatitis,
(Descemet membrane, producing Kayser Fleischer
tion) or cirrhosis of liver, tremor may be
ring)
“wing beating”
Lesions in basal ganglia (especially putamen)
Treatment: penicillamine (a chelator), zinc acetate
(blocks absorption)
Hemiballism Wild, flinging movements of limbs Hemorrhagic destruction of contralateral
subthalamic nucleus
Hypertensive patients
Tourette Motor tics and vocal tics (e.g., Treatment: Antipsychotic agents
syndrome snorting, sniffing, uncontrolled and
often obscene vocalizations),
commonly associated with OCD and
ADHD
Abbreviations: ADHD, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; MPTP, 1 methyl 4 phenyl 1,2,3, 6 tetrahydropyridine; OCD, obsessive
compulsive disorder
32
CHAPTER 7 | BASAL GANGLIA
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Lesions/diseases of the basal ganglia generally present with movement
disorders (“dyskinesias”) and an involuntary tremor or tremor at rest. Most
of these disorders seem to preferentially affect either the direct or the indirect
pathway, altering the balance between the two.
Lesions of the direct pathway result in an underactive cortex and hypokinetic
disturbances that slow or halt spontaneous movements. The best known
disorder is caused by the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons of the
substantia nigra in Parkinson disease. Because the cortex is underactive,
Parkinson patients have problems initiating movements, combined with a
reduction in the velocity and amplitude of the movements. The tremor at
rest is the classic pill rolling tremor seen in the fingers. Skeletal muscles in
the upper limbs exhibit a cogwheel rigidity because of increased muscle
tone. Other symptoms include stooped posture, an expressionless face, and a
festinating or accelerating gait during which individuals seem to chase their
center of gravity. Strategies for Parkinson are L dopa, a dopamine precursor
that crosses the blood–brain barrier, or anticholinergic drugs, which inhibit
the effects of acetylcholine on the indirect pathway.
Lesions to parts of the indirect pathway result in an overactive motor
cortex. An overactive cortex produces hyperkinetic disturbances, expressed
in numerous spontaneous movements. The involuntary tremors seen in these
diseases range from being dancelike in chorea to ballistic with lesions to the
subthalamic nucleus.
• Chorea produces involuntary movements that are purposeless, quick jerks
that may be superimposed on voluntary movements.
– Huntington chorea exhibits autosomal dominant inheritance (chromo
some 4) and is characterized by severe degeneration of GABA neurons
in the striatum. Symptoms include athetoid movements, progressive
dementia, and behavioral disorders.
– Sydenham chorea is a transient complication in some children with
rheumatic fever.
• Athetosis refers to slow, worm like, involuntary movements that are most
noticeable in the fingers and hands but may involve any muscle group. It is
present in Huntington disease and may be observed in many diseases that
involve the basal ganglia.
• Dystonia (often seen with athetosis) is a slow, prolonged movement
involving predominantly the truncal musculature. Examples include
blepharospasm (contraction of the orbicularis oculi causing the eyelids
to close), spasmodic torticollis (pulling of the head toward the shoulder),
and writer’s cramp (contraction of arm and hand muscles on attempting
to write).
• Hemiballismus results from a lesion of the subthalamic nucleus
usually seen in hypertensive patients. Hemiballismus refers to a violent
projectile movement of a limb and is typically observed in the upper limb
contralateral to the involved subthalamic nucleus.
32
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
• Tourette syndrome involves facial and vocal tics that progress to jerking
movements of the limbs. It is frequently associated with explosive, vulgar
speech.
Pharmacology Biochemistry • Wilson disease results from an abnormality of copper metabolism, causing
the accumulation of copper in the liver and basal ganglia. Personality
changes, tremor, dystonia, and athetoid movements develop. A thin brown
ring around the outer cornea (Kayser Fleischer ring) may be present and
aid in the diagnosis. Untreated patients usually succumb because of hepatic
Physiology MedicalGenetics
cirrhosis.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Microbiology
Figure III 7 5. Basal Ganglia Connections
32
8#
Visual Pathways
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Use knowledge of eyeball and optic nerve
❏ Solve problems concerning visual reflexes
❏ Answer questions about lesions of the visual pathways
EYEBALL AND OPTIC NERVE
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Light must pass through the cornea, aqueous humor, pupil, lens, and vitreous
Vitamin A, necessary for retinal transduction,
humor before reaching the retina. It must then pass through the layers of the retina
cannot be synthesized by humans. Dietary
to reach the photoreceptive layer of rods and cones. The outer segments of rods
deficiency of vitamin A causes visual
and cones transduce light energy from photons into membrane potentials.
Photopigments in rods and cones absorb photons, and this causes a conforma impairment resulting in night blindness.
tional change in the molecular structure of these pigments. This molecular
alteration causes sodium channels to close, a hyperpolarization of the membranes
of the rods and cones, and a reduction in the amount of neurotransmitter released.
Thus, rods and cones release less neurotransmitter in the light and more neu
rotransmitter in the dark.
Rods and cones have synaptic contacts on bipolar cells that project to ganglion
cells (Figure III 8 2). Axons from the ganglion cells converge at the optic disc to
form the optic nerve, which enters the cranial cavity through the optic foramen. At
the optic disc, these axons acquire a myelin sheath from the oligodendrocytes of
the CNS.
• Open angle glaucoma is a chronic condition (often with increased
CLINICAL CORRELATE
intraocular pressure [IOP]) due to decreased reabsorption of aqueous
humor, leading to progressive (painless) visual loss and, if left untreated, The most common cause of open angle
blindness. IOP is a balance between fluid formation and its drainage from
glaucoma is decreased drainage into the
the globe.
canal of Schlemm.
• Narrow angle glaucoma is an acute (painful) or chronic (genetic) condi
tion with increased IOP due to blockade of the canal of Schlemm. Emer
gency treatment prior to surgery often involves cholinomimetics, carbonic
anhydrase inhibitors, and/or mannitol.
32
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Ciliary muscle
(CN III parasympathetics)
Dilator pupillae
Sclera
Pharmacology Biochemistry (sympathetics)
Choroid
Constrictor pupillae
Retina (CN III parasympathetics)
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Fovea (in macula)
Cornea (V1)
(cones only)
Lens
Anterior chamber
Optic disc
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Iris
Posterior chamber
Vitreous humor
(production of
aqueous humor)
Microbiology
Canal of Schlemm
(drains aqueous humor)
FigureFigure IIIIII88 11.. TThhee EyebEaylelball
VISUAL REFLEXES
Pupillary Light Reflex
When light is directed into an eye, it stimulates retinal photoreceptors and results
in impulses carried in the optic nerve to the pretectal area. Cells in the pretectal
area send axons to the Edinger Westphal nuclei on both sides.
The Edinger Westphal nucleus is the parasympathetic nucleus of the oculomotor
nerve and gives rise to preganglionic parasympathetic fibers that pass in the third
cranial nerve to the ciliary ganglion. Because cells in the pretectal area supply both
Edinger Westphal nuclei, shining light into one eye results in constriction of both
the ipsilateral pupil (direct light reflex) and contralateral pupil (consensual light
reflex).
32
CHAPTER 8 | VISUAL PATHWAYS
Table III 8 1. Pupillary Light Reflex Pathway
Afferent Limb: CN II
Light stimulates ganglion
Pretectal area retinal cells → impulses travel
up CNII which projects bilater
ally to the pretectal nuclei
(midbrain)
Edinger
The pretectal nucleus projects
Westphal
bilaterally → Edinger
nucleus
Westphal nuclei (CN III)
Ciliary
Efferent Limb: CN III
Ganglion
Edinger Westphal nucleus
Pupil (preganglionic parasympathetic)
→ ciliary ganglion (post
ganglionic parasympathetic) →
pupillary sphincter muscle →
miosis
Because cells in the pretectal area supply the Edinger Westphal nuclei
bilaterally, shining light in one eye → constriction in the ipsilateral pupil
(direct light reflex) and the contralateral pupil (consensual light reflex).
Because this reflex does not involve the visual cortex, a person who is
cortically blind can still have this reflex.
Accommodation Convergence Reaction
Accommodation–convergence reaction is a reflex action of the eye that occurs
when someone tries to focus on a nearby object after having just looked at a
distant object. The oculomotor nerve carries the efferent fibers from the accom
modation–convergence reaction, which consists of 3 components:
• Accommodation refers to the reflex that increases the curvature of the
lens needed for near vision. Preganglionic parasympathetic fibers arise in
the Edinger Westphal nucleus and pass via the oculomotor nerve to the
ciliary ganglion. Postganglionic parasympathetic fibers from the ciliary
ganglion supply the ciliary muscle. Contraction of this muscle relaxes the
suspensory ligaments and allows the lens to increase its convexity (become
more round). This increases the refractive index of the lens, permitting the
image of a nearby object to focus on the retina.
• Convergence results from contraction of both medial rectus muscles
(which pull the eyes to look toward the nose). This allows the image of the
near object to focus on the same part of the retina in each eye.
• Pupillary constriction (miosis) results from contraction of the constrictor
muscle of the iris. A smaller aperture gives the optic apparatus a greater
depth of field. With Argyll Robertson pupils, both direct and consensual
light reflexes are lost, but the accommodation–convergence reaction
remains intact. This type of pupil is common with neurosyphilis (but also
MS, pineal tumors, and tabes dorsalis). The lesion site is believed to occur
near the pretectal nuclei just rostral to the superior colliculi.
32
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
The eye is predominantly innervated by the parasympathetic nervous system, thus
treatment with muscarinic antagonists or ganglionic blockers can be quite
effective for eye conditions (e.g., by blocking the parasympathetic nervous system).
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Table III 8 2. Pharmacology of the Eye
Predominant Receptor Receptor
Structure
Receptor Stimulation Blockade
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Pupillary M3 receptor Contraction → Relaxation →
sphincter ms. (PANS) miosis mydriasis
(iris)
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Radial dilator α receptor (SANS) Contraction → Relaxation →
ms. (iris)
mydriasis miosis
Ciliary ms. M3 receptor Contraction → Relaxation →
(PANS) accommodation focus for far
Microbiology
for near vision vision
Ciliary body Decreased
β receptor (SANS) Secretion of
epithelium aqueous humor aqueous humor
production
Abbreviations: ms., muscle; PANS, parasympathetic nervous system; SANS, sympathet
ic nervous system
Table III 8 3. Accommodation Convergence Reaction
When an individual focuses on a nearby object after looking at a distant
object, 3 events occur:
1. Accommodation
2. Convergence
3. Pupillary constriction (miosis)
In general, stimuli from light → visual cortex → superior colliculus and
pretectal nucleus → Edinger Westphal nucleus (1, 3) and oculomotor
nucleus (2).
Accommodation: Parasympathetic fibers contract the ciliary muscle,
which relaxes suspensory ligaments, allowing the lens to increase its
convexity (become more round). This increases the refractive index of
the lens, thereby focusing a nearby object on the retina.
Convergence: Both medial rectus muscles contract, adducting both
eyes.
Pupillary constriction: Parasympathetic fibers contract the pupillary
sphincter muscle → miosis.
32
CHAPTER 8 | VISUAL PATHWAYS
Table III 8 4. Clinical Correlates
Pupillary Abnormalities
Argyll Robertson • No direct or consensual light reflex;
pupil (pupillary accommodation convergence intact
light near
• Seen in neurosyphilis, diabetes
dissociation)
Relative afferent • Lesion of afferent limb of pupillary light reflex;
(Marcus Gunn) diagnosis made with swinging flashlight
pupil
• Shine light in Marcus Gunn pupil → pupils do
not constrict fully
• Shine light in normal eye → pupils constrict
fully
• Shine light immediately again in affected eye →
apparent dilation of both pupils because
stimulus carried through that CN II is weaker;
seen in MS
Horner syndrome • Caused by a lesion of the oculosympathetic
pathway; syndrome consists of miosis, ptosis,
apparent enophthalmos, and hemianhidrosis
Adie pupil • Dilated pupil that reacts sluggishly to light, but
better to accommodation; often seen in women
and often associated with loss of knee jerks.
Ciliary ganglion lesion
Transtentorial • Increased intracranial pressure → leads to
(uncal) herniation uncal herniation → CN III compression → fixed
and dilated pupil, “down and out” eye, ptosis
32
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
To lateral geniculate
Site of detached
body, pretectal nucleus
retina These axons will make
up the optic nerve
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciencesChoroi
Light
Microbiology
Rod Outer Inner
Ganglion Vitreous
nuclear nuclear
layer humor
layer layer
Cone
Pigment Nuclei of Bipolar
epithelium rods and cells
cones
Figure IIIFig8ure2. IIRIetin8a 2. Retina
NOTE
At the optic chiasm, 60% of the optic nerve fibers from the nasal half of each retina
Photoreceptor Rods: 1 kind cross and project into the contralateral optic tract (Figure III 8 3). Fibers from the
temporal retina do not cross at the chiasm and instead pass into the ipsilateral
• Achromatic
optic tract. The optic tract contains remixed optic nerve fibers from the temporal
• Low light sensitive
part of the ipsilateral retina and fibers from the nasal part of the contralateral
• Night vision, motion retina. Because the eye inverts images like a camera, in reality each nasal retina
receives information from a temporal hemifield, and each temporal retina receives
Cones: 3 kinds
information from a nasal hemifield. Most fibers in the optic tract project to the
• Red, green, blue lateral geniculate nucleus. Optic tract fibers also project to the superior colliculi for
• Chromatic reflex gaze, to the pretectal area for the light reflex, and to the suprachiasmatic
nucleus of the hypothalamus for circadian rhythms.
• Bright light sensitive
• Object recognition
NOTE
Like a camera, the lens inverts the image of
the visual field, so the nasal retina receives
information from the temporal visual field,
and the temporal retina receives information
from the nasal visual field.
At the optic chiasm, optic nerve fibers from
the nasal half of each retina cross and
project to the contralateral optic tract.
330
CHAPTER 8 | VISUAL PATHWAYS
Visual Field Defects
Visual Fields
Temporal Nasal Temporal
Defects
Ganglion cells
Retinae
of left eye Anopia of retina
Left nasal
hemianopia 1
3
Optic nerve
2 Optic chiasm
Bitemporal
Red nucleus Optic tract
heteronymous
hemianopia
4 Substantia nigra
Medial lemniscus
Crus cerebri
Right 5
Meyer
homonymous loop
hemianopia
LGNu
MGNu MGNu
homonymous SC,Br Right SC,Br
superior
PULNuPULNu
quadrantanopia
Superior colliculus Oculomotor nucleus
6
Pretectal nucleus Edinger Westphal centrally
Edinger Westphal projecting nucleus
preganglionic nucleus
homonymous Right
Cuneus
inferior
Optic radiations
quadrantanopia (in retrolenticular limb
of internal capsule)
homonymous Right Lingual gyrus
7
hemianopia with
macular sparing CalSul
Figure III 8 3. Visual Pathways
1, 2 Optic nerve, 3 Chiasm, 4 Tract
NOTE
Visual information from lower retina courses
in lateral fibers forming Meyer’s loop, which
Fi⯑u⯑e ⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑⯑V⯑isual Pathways projects to the lingual gyrus.
1, 2 Optic nerve, 3 Chiasm, 4 Tract
33
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Some Causes of Lesions
1. Optic neuritis, central retinal artery occlusion
Pharmacology Biochemistry
2. Internal carotid artery aneurysm
3. Pituitary adenoma (begins as superior quadrantanopia)
Craniopharyngioma (begins as inferior quadrantanopia)
Physiology MedicalGenetics
4. Vascular
5. Middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion
6,7. Posterior cerebral artery occlusion Macula is spared in 7 due to
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
collateral blood supply from MCA.
NOTE Most fibers from the optic tract project to the lateral geniculate body (LGB);
Microbiology
some also project to the pretectal area (light reflex), the superior colliculi (reflex
Lesions to the visual radiations are more
gaze), and the suprachiasmatic nuclei (circadian rhythm). The LGB projects to the
common than lesions to the optic tract.
primary visual cortex (striate cortex, Brodmann area 17) of the occipital lobe via
the optic radiations.
• Visual information from the lower retina (upper contralateral visual field)
→ temporal lobe (Meyer loop) → lingual gyrus
• Visual information from the upper retina (lower contralateral visual field)
→ parietal lobe → cuneus gyrus
The lateral geniculate body (LGB) is a laminated structure that receives input
from the optic tract and gives rise to axons that terminate on cells in the primary
visual cortex (striate cortex, Brodmann area 17) of the occipital lobe. The LGB
laminae maintain a segregation of inputs from the ipsilateral and contralateral
retina.
The axons from the LGB that project to the striate cortex are known as optic
radiations, visual radiations, or the geniculocalcarine tract. The calcarine sulcus
divides the striate cortex (primary visual cortex or Brodmann area 17) into the
cuneus and the lingual gyri. The cuneus gyrus, which lies on the superior bank of
CLINICAL CORRELATE the calcarine cortex, receives the medial fibers of the visual radiations. The lingual
gyrus, which lies on the inferior bank of the calcarine cortex, receives the lateral
Unilateral optic nerve lesions are seen in
fibers of the visual radiation. The medial fibers coursing in the visual radiations,
MS, where there is an immune related
which carry input from the upper retina (i.e., the lower contralateral visual field),
inflammatory demyelination of the nerve. The pass from the LGB directly through the parietal lobe to reach the cuneus gyrus.
lesion typically presents with a central Significantly, the lateral fibers coursing in the visual radiations, which carry input
from the lower retina (i.e., the upper contralateral visual field), take a circuitous
scotoma due to involvement of the deep
route from the LGB through Meyer loop anteriorly into the temporal lobe. The
fibers in the nerve from the macula.
fibers of Meyer loop then turn posteriorly and course through the parietal lobe to
reach the lingual gyrus in the striate cortex.
33
CHAPTER 8 | VISUAL PATHWAYS
LESIONS OF THE VISUAL PATHWAYS
Lesions of the retina that include destruction of the macula produce a central
scotoma. The macula is quite sensitive to intense light, trauma, aging, and neuro
toxins.
Lesions of an optic nerve produce blindness (anopsia) in that eye and a loss of the
sensory limb of the light reflex. The pupil of the affected eye constricts when light
is shined into the opposite eye (consensual light reflex) but not when light is
shined into the blinded eye (absence of direct light reflex).
Compression of the optic chiasm, often the result of a pituitary tumor or
meningioma, results in a loss of peripheral vision in both temporal fields because
the crossing fibers from each nasal retina are damaged. The resulting visual field
defect is called a bitemporal heteronymous hemianopia.
All lesions past the chiasm produce contralateral defects. Lesions of the optic tract
result in a loss of visual input from the contralateral visual field. For example, a
lesion of the right optic tract results in a loss of input from the left visual field.
This is called a homonymous hemianopia; in this example, a left homonymous
hemianopia.
Lesions of the visual radiations are more common than lesions to the optic tract or
lateral geniculate body and produce visual field defects (a contralateral homony
mous hemianopia) similar to those of the optic tract if all fibers are involved.
Lesions restricted to the lateral fibers in Meyer loop, usually in the temporal lobe,
result in a loss of visual input from the contralateral upper quarter of the visual
field. For example, a lesion of the temporal fibers in the right visual radiation
results in loss of visual input from the upper left quarter of the field
(a left superior quadrantanopia).
Lesions restricted to the medial fibers in the visual radiation in the parietal lobe
result in a loss of visual input from the contralateral lower quarter of the field (an
inferior quadrantanopia).
Lesions inside the primary visual cortex are equivalent to those of the visual
radiations, resulting in a contralateral homonymous hemianopsia, except that
macular (central) vision is spared.
Lesions of the cuneus gyrus are equivalent to lesions restricted to the parietal
fibers of the visual radiation, with macular sparing.
Lesions of the lingula are similar to lesions of the Meyer’s loop fibers except for the
presence of macular sparing. The pupillary light reflex is spared in lesions of the
radiations or inside visual cortex because fibers of the pupillary light reflex leave
the optic tracts to terminate in the pretectal area. The combination of blindness
with intact pupillary reflexes is termed cortical blindness.
33

9#
Diencephalon
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Interpret scenarios on thalamus
❏ Demonstrate understanding of hypothalamus
❏ Use knowledge of epithalamus
DIENCEPHALON
The diencephalon can be divided into 4 parts: the thalamus, the hypothalamus, the
epithalamus, and the subthalamus.
Thalamus
The thalamus serves as the major sensory relay for the ascending tactile, visual,
auditory, and gustatory information that ultimately reaches the neocortex. Motor
control areas such as the basal ganglia and cerebellum also synapse in thalamic
nuclei before they reach their cortical destinations. Other nuclei participate in the
regulation of states of consciousness.
33
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Table III 9 1. Thalamus
Thalamus—serves as a major sensory relay for information that ultimately reaches the neocortex. Motor control
areas (basal ganglia, cerebellum) also synapse in the thalamus before reaching the cortex. Other nuclei regulate
states of consciousness.
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Thalamic Nuclei Input Output
VPL Sensory from body and Somatosensory cortex
limbs
Physiology MedicalGenetics
VPM Sensory from face, taste Somatosensory cortex
VA/VL Motor info from BG, Motor cortices
Internal medullary lamina
cerebellum
Pathology AN BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
LGB Visual from optic tract First degree visual
cortex
VA MD
MGB Auditory from inferior First degree auditory
VL
VPL colliculus cortex
Microbiology
Pulvinar AN Mamillary nucleus (via Cingulate gyrus (part
VPM
mammillothalamic tract) of Papez circuit)
MD (Dorsomedial nucleus). Involved in memory
LGBMGB
Damaged in Wernicke Korsakoff syndrome
Figure TB IV 9 1. Diencephalon
Pulvinar Helps integrate somesthetic, visual, and auditory
input
Midline/ Involved in arousal
intralaminar
Abbreviations: AN, anterior nuclear group; BG, basal ganglia; LGB, lateral geniculate body; MD, mediodorsal nucleus; MGB, medial
geniculate body; VA, ventral anterior nucleus; VL, ventral lateral nucleus; VPL, ventroposterolateral nucleus; VPM, ventroposterome
dial nucleus
Major Thalamic Nuclei and Their Inputs and Outputs
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Thiamine deficiency in alcoholics results in
degeneration of the dorsomedial nucleus of Anterior nuclear group (part of the Papez circuit of limbic system)
thalamus and the mammillary bodies, Input is from the mammillary bodies via the mammillothalamic tract and from
hippocampus, and vermis of the cerebellum. the cingulate gyrus; output is to the cingulate gyrus via the anterior limb of the
internal capsule.
CLINICAL CORRELATE Medial nuclear group (part of limbic system)
Thalamic pain syndrome affects the ventral Input is from the amygdala, prefrontal cortex, and temporal lobe; output is to the
prefrontal cortex and cingulate gyrus. The most important nucleus is the dorsome
nuclear group. Patients present with burning,
dial nucleus.
aching pain in contralateral limbs or body.
Involvement of the dorsal column medial
lemniscal part of VPL increases the
Ventral nuclear group
sensitivity to pain and presents as
Motor Nuclei
contralateral loss of vibratory sense and gait
Ventral anterior nucleus (VA): Input to VA is from the globus pallidus, substantia
ataxia. Thalamic pain syndrome is resistant
nigra. Output is to the premotor and primary motor cortex
to analgesic medications.
336
CHAPTER 9 | DIENCEPHALON
Ventral lateral nucleus (VL): Input to VL is mainly from the globus pallidus and
the dentate nucleus of the cerebellum. Output is to the primary motor cortex
(Brodmann area 4).
Sensory Nuclei
Ventral posterolateral (VPL) nucleus: Input to VPL conveying somatosensory and
nociceptive information ascends in the medial lemniscus and spinothalamic tract.
Output is to primary somatosensory cortex (Brodmann areas 3, 1, and 2) of the
parietal lobe.
Ventral posteromedial (VPM) nucleus: Input to VPM is from the ascending
trigeminal and taste pathways. Output is to primary somatosensory cortex
(Brodmann areas 3, 1, and 2) of the parietal lobe.
Medial geniculate body (nucleus): Input is from auditory information that ascends
from the inferior colliculus. Output is to primary auditory cortex.
Lateral geniculate body (nucleus): Input is from the optic tract. Output is in the
form of the geniculocalcarine or visual radiations that project to the primary visual
(striate) cortex in the occipital lobe.
Midline and Intralaminar Nuclei
Midline and intralaminar nuclei receive input from the brain stem reticular
formation, and from the spinothalamic tract. Intralaminar nuclei send pain
information to the cingulate gyrus. These nuclei appear to be important in
mediating desynchronization of the EEG during behavioral arousal.
Hypothalamus
The hypothalamus is composed of numerous nuclei that have afferent and efferent
connections with widespread regions of the nervous system, including the
pituitary gland, the autonomic system, and the limbic system.
33
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Table III 9 2. Hypothalamus, Epithalamus, Subthalamus
Hypothalamus—helps maintain homeostasis; has roles in the autonomic, endocrine, and limbic systems
Hypothalamic Nuclei Functions and Lesions
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Lateral hypothalamic Feeding center; lesion → starvation
Ventromedial Satiety center; lesion → hyperphagia, obesity, savage behavior
Suprachiasmatic Regulates circadian rhythms, receives direct retinal input
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Supraoptic and Synthesizes antidiuretic hormone and oxytocin; regulates water balance
paraventricular
Lesion → diabetes insipidus, characterized by polydipsia and polyuria
Pathology Mamillary body BehavioralScience/SocIinapluStciencesfrom hippocampus; damaged in Wernicke encephalopathy
Arcuate Produces hypothalamic releasing and inhibiting factors and gives rise to tuberohy
pophysial tract
Has neurons that produce dopamine (prolactin inhibiting factor)
Microbiology
Anterior region
Temperature regulation; lesion → hyperthermia
Stimulates the parasympathetic nervous system
Posterior region
Temperature regulation; lesion → poikilothermia (inability to thermoregulate)
Stimulates sympathetic nervous system
Preoptic area Regulates release of gonotrophic hormones; contains sexually dimorphic nucleus
Lesion before puberty → arrested sexual development; lesion after puberty →
amenorrhea or impotence
Dorsomedial
Stimulation → savage behavior
Epithalamus—Consists of pineal body and habenular nuclei. The pineal body secretes melatonin with a
circadian rhythm.
Subthalamus—The subthalamic nucleus is involved in basal ganglia circuitry. Lesion → hemiballismus
(contralateral flinging movements of one or both extremities)
33
CHAPTER 9 | DIENCEPHALON
Major Hypothalamic Regions or Zones, and Their Nuclei CLINICAL CORRELATE
Dopaminergic projections from the
Lamina terminalis Paraventricular nucleus
arcuate nuclei inhibit prolactin
secretion from the anterior pituitary.
Anterior commissure Dorsomedial nucleus
Lesions result in galactorrhea (milk
Preoptic nuclei discharge) and amenorrhea.
Posterior
A
hypothalamus
Anterior hypothalamus M
P (sympathetic)
(parasympathetic) CLINICAL CORRELATE
Descending Lesions of the mammillary bodies
Suprachiasmatic nucleus
hypothalamic
occur in korsakoff syndrome and are
fibers
usually associated with thiamine
Supraoptic nucleus
Mammillary body deficiency associated with chronic
alcoholism. Korsakoff syndrome results
Optic tract/chiasm Ventromedial nucleus
in both anterograde and retrograde
Arcuate nucleus
amnesia with confabulations.
Anterior pituitary
Median eminence
(adenohypophysis; derived
from oral ectoderm of Posterior ppiittuuiittaarryy
Rathke’s pouch) (neurohypophysis; ophysis;
outgrowth ooff CCNNSS))
Magnocellular neurons
in paraventricular
and supraoptic nuclei
Parvocellular neuron
in arcuate nuclei
Releasing and
Infundibulum
inhibiting hormones
Oxytocin and
Superior
vasopressin (ADH)
hypophyseal artery
Inferior
Hypothalamic hypophyseal artery
hypophyseal portal system
Anterior pituitary
cells
Hypophyseal veins
Drain into cavernous sinus
Figure III Fi9gure1. (IAII) 9O1r.gani(zAa)tionOrganization ofofthethe HHyyppootthhaallaammuuss (Sagittal(SagitStaelction) Section)
(B) Secretory (B) SecreMtoercyhanismsMechanisms ofofthtehe AAddeennoo and anNdeuro NeuHroypophysisHypophysis
33
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Anterior region
The paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei synthesize the neuropeptides
antidiuretic hormone (ADH) and oxytocin. Axons arising from these nuclei leave
the hypothalamus and course in the supraopticohypophysial tract, which carries
Pharmacology Biochemistry
neurosecretory granules to the posterior pituitary gland, where they are released
into capillaries. Lesions of the supraoptic nuclei lead to diabetes insipidus, which is
characterized by polydipsia (excess water consumption) and polyuria (excess
urination).
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Visual input from the retina by way of the optic tract terminates in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus. This information helps set certain body rhythms to the
24 hour light dark cycle (circadian rhythms).
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Paraventricular nucleus Posterior
nucleus
Dorsomedial nucleus Thalamus
Microbiology
Preoptic area
Anterior nucleus
Pineal gland
Suprachiasmatic nucleus
Supraoptic nucleus
Midbrain
Optic chiasm
Cerebral aqueduct
Arcuate nucleus
Pons
Infundibulum
Hypophysis
Ventromedial
nucleus Mammillary body
Figure III 9 2. The Hypothalamic Nuclei
Figure III 9 2. The Hypothalamic Nuclei
Tuberal region
Cells in the arcuate nucleus produce releasing hormones and inhibitory factors,
which enter capillaries in the tuberoinfundibular tract and pass through the
hypophyseal portal veins to reach the secondary capillary plexus in the anterior
pituitary gland. Releasing hormones and inhibitory factors influence the secretory
activity of the acidophils and basophils in the anterior pituitary. (See Histology
section.)
34
CHAPTER 9 | DIENCEPHALON
The ventromedial hypothalamus is a satiety center and regulates food intake.
Lesions of the ventromedial hypothalamus result in obesity.
Posterior region
The mammillary nuclei are located in the mammillary bodies and are part of the
limbic system. The mammillothalamic tract originates in the mammillary nuclei
and terminates in the anterior nuclear group of the thalamus.
Anterior hypothalamic zone
The anterior hypothalamic zone senses an elevation of body temperature and
mediates the response to dissipate heat. Lesions of the anterior hypothalamus lead
to hyperthermia.
Posterior hypothalamic zone
The posterior hypothalamic zone senses a decrease of body temperature and
mediates the conservation of heat. Lesions of the posterior hypothalamus lead to
poikilothermy (i.e., cold blooded organisms). An individual with a lesion of the
posterior hypothalamus has a body temperature that varies with the environmen
tal temperature.
Lateral hypothalamic zone
The lateral hypothalamic zone is a feeding center; lesions of the lateral hypothala
mus produce severe aphagia.
Preoptic area
The preoptic area is sensitive to androgens and estrogens, whereas other areas
influence the production of sex hormones through their regulation of the anterior
pituitary. Before puberty, hypothalamic lesions here may arrest sexual develop
ment.
After puberty, hypothalamic lesions in this area may result in amenorrhea or
impotence.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
EPITHALAMUS
The epithalamus is the part of the diencephalon located in the region of the • In young males, pineal lesions may
posterior commissure which consists of the pineal body and the habenular nuclei. cause precocious puberty.
• The pineal body is a small, highly vascularized structure situated above • Pineal tumors may cause obstruction
the posterior commissure and attached by a stalk to the roof of the third of CSF flow and increased intracranial
ventricle. It contains pinealocytes and glial cells but no neurons. Pinealo pressure. Compression of the upper
cytes synthesize melatonin, serotonin, and cholecystokinin.
midbrain and pretectal area by a
• The pineal gland plays a role in growth, development, and the regulation pineal tumor results in Parinaud
of circadian rhythms.
syndrome, in which there is
• Environmental light regulates the activity of the pineal gland through a impairment of conjugate vertical gaze
retinal–suprachiasmatic–pineal pathway. and pupillary reflex abnormalities
• The subthalamus is reviewed with the basal ganglia.
341

10 #
Cerebral Cortex
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Answer questions about general features
❏ Solve problems concerning language and the dominant hemisphere
❏ Solve problems concerning blood supply
GENERAL FEATURES
The surface of the cerebral cortex is highly convoluted with the bulges or eminenc
es, referred to as gyri; and the spaces separating the gyri, called sulci. Lobes of the
cerebrum are divided according to prominent gyri and sulci that are fairly constant
in humans.
Two prominent sulci on the lateral surface are key to understanding the divisions
of the hemispheres. The lateral fissure (of Sylvius) separates the frontal and
temporal lobes rostrally; further posteriorly, it partially separates the parietal and
the temporal lobes. The central sulcus (of Rolando) is situated roughly perpen
dicular to the lateral fissure. The central sulcus separates the frontal and the
parietal lobes. The occipital lobe extends posteriorly from the temporal and
parietal lobes, but its boundaries on the lateral aspect of the hemisphere are
indistinct. On the medial aspect of the hemisphere, the frontal and parietal lobes
are separated by a cingulate sulcus from the cingulate gyrus. The cingulate is part
of an artificial limbic lobe. Posteriorly, the parieto occipital sulcus separates the
parietal lobe from the occipital lobe. The calcarine sulcus divides the occipital lobe
horizontally into a superior cuneus and an inferior lingual gyrus.
34
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Central sulcus
F: frontal lobe
Postcentral
Precentral
gyrus
P: parietal lobe gyrus
Superior
Superior frontal
Pharmacology T: temporal lobe Biochemistry parietal lobule
P gyrus
F
Inferior
O: occipital lobe Middle frontal
parietal lobule
gyrus
F
Supramarginal
Inferior frontal
P
Physiology MedicalGenetics gyrus O T gyrus T:
Lateral sulcus
Superior temporal gyrus
Middle temporal gyrus
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Inferior temporal gyrus
Pons
Cerebellum
Medulla oblongata
Microbiology
Figure III 10 1. Lateral View of the Right Cerebral Hemisphere
Figure III 10 1. Lateral View of the Right Cerebral Hemisphere
Fornix Cingulate Precentral gyrus
sulcus
Central sulcus
Interthalamic adhesion
Cingulate gyrus
Septum pellucidum
Postcentral gyrus
Interventricular foramen
Corpus callosum
Anterior commissure
Thalamus
Third ventricle Splenium
Lamina terminalis Parieto occipital sulcus
Cuneus gyrus
Hypothalamus
Calcarine sulcus
Optic chiasm
Lingual gyrus
Tuber cinereum
Pineal body
Pituitary
Cerebellum
Mammillary body
Cerebral aqueduct
Pons
Fourth ventricle
Figure III 10 2. Medial View of the Right Cerebral Hemisphere
Figure III 10 2. Medial View of the Right Cerebral Hemisphere
About 90% of the cortex is composed of 6 layers, which form the neocortex
(Figure III 10 5). The olfactory cortex and hippocampal formation are 3 layered
structures and together comprise the allocortex. All of the neocortex contains a
344
CHAPTER 10 | CEREBRAL CORTEX
6 layer cellular arrangement, but the actual structure varies considerably between
different locations. On the basis of these variations in the cytoarchitecture,
Brodmann divided the cortex into 47 areas, but only a few Brodmann numbers are
used synonymously with functionally specific cortical areas.
MCA
M ACA L
A
E
T
D
E
I
R
A
A
L
L
Figure III 10 3.FigMuroetor HoImIIuncu1l0us 3. iMnotPorrecentralHomuncGuyluruss (Area 4)inFroPnrteaclentralLobe (Coronal Section)
Gyrus (Area 4) Frontal Lobe (Coronal Section)
ACA
MCA
Figure III 10 4. Sensory Homunculus in Postcentral Gyrus (Areas 3, 1, 2) Parietal Lobe
Figure III 10 4. Sensory(Coronal HomSuencctuioluns) in Postcentral
Gyrus (Areas 3, 1, 2) Parietal Lobe (Coronal Section)
34
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
NOTE Efferent Afferent
cortical fibers cortical fibers
The internal granular layer is the site of
termination of the thalamocortical
I. Molecular layer
Pharmacologpyrojections. In primary visual Bcioorctehxe,mistrythese
fibers form a distinct Line of Gennari. The
II. External granular layer
internal pyramidal layer gives rise to axons
that form the corticospinal and
Physiologycorticobulbar tracts. MedicalGenetics
III. External pyramidal layer
IV. Internal granular layer
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
V. Internal pyramidal layer
Microbiology
VI. Multiform layer
(layer of polymorphic cells)
Figure III 10 5. The Six Layered Neocortex
Figure III 10 5. The 6 Layered Neocortex
LANGUAGE AND THE DOMINANT HEMISPHERE
Most people (about 80%) are right handed, which implies that the left side of the
brain has more highly developed hand controlling circuits. In the vast majority of
right handed people, speech and language functions are also predominantly
organized in the left hemisphere. Most left handed people show language
functions bilaterally, although a few, with strong left handed preferences, show
right sided speech and language functions.
BLOOD SUPPLY
The cortex is supplied by the 2 internal carotid arteries and the 2 vertebral arteries
(Figures III 10 6 and III 10 7). On the base (or inferior surface) of the brain,
branches of the internal carotid arteries and the basilar artery anastomose to form
the circle of Willis. The anterior part of the circle lies in front of the optic chiasm,
whereas the posterior part is situated just below the mammillary bodies. The circle
of Willis is formed by the terminal part of the internal carotid arteries; the
proximal parts of the anterior and posterior cerebral arteries and the anterior and
posterior communicating arteries. The middle, anterior, and posterior cerebral
arteries, which arise from the circle of Willis, supply all of the cerebral cortex, basal
ganglia, and diencephalon.
The internal carotid artery arises from the bifurcation of the common carotid and
enters the skull through the carotid canal. It enters the subarachnoid space and
terminates by dividing into the anterior and middle cerebral arteries.
34
CHAPTER 10 | CEREBRAL CORTEX
Just before splitting into the middle and anterior cerebral arteries, the internal
carotid artery gives rise to the ophthalmic artery. The ophthalmic artery enters the
orbit through the optic canal and supplies the eye, including the retina and optic
nerve.
The middle cerebral artery is the larger terminal branch of the internal carotid
CLINICAL CORRELATE
artery. It supplies the bulk of the lateral surface of the hemisphere. Exceptions are
the superior inch of the frontal and parietal lobes, which are supplied by the Occlusion of the middle cerebral artery
anterior cerebral artery, and the inferior part of the temporal lobe and the occipital results in spastic paresis of the contralateral
pole, which are supplied by the posterior cerebral artery. The middle cerebral lower face and upper limb and anesthesia of
artery also supplies the genu and posterior limb of the internal capsule and the
the contralateral face and upper limb.
basal ganglia.
An aphasia (e.g., Broca, Wernicke, or
conduction) may result when branches of
Anterior
the left middle cerebral artery are affected,
cerebral
artery and left sided neglect may be seen with a
Superior
blockage of branches of the right middle
parietal lobule Superior
frontal cerebral artery to the right parietal lobe.
gyrus
The middle cerebral artery also supplies the
Posterior proximal parts of the visual radiations as
Frontal pole
cerebral they emerge from the lateral geniculate
artery
nucleus of the thalamus and course in
Middle cerebral Meyer’s loop. These fibers course into the
artery
temporal lobe before looping posteriorly to
rejoin the rest of the visual radiation fibers.
Temporal pole
Occlusion of the branches that supply
Meyer’s loop fibers in the temporal lobe
Inferior
results in a contralateral superior
temporal gyrus
quadrantanopia.
Figure III 10 6. The Distributions of the Cerebral Arteries: Part 1 NOTE
Figure III 10 6. The Distributions of the Cerebral Arteries: Part 1
The middle cerebral artery (MCA) supplies:
The anterior cerebral artery is the smaller terminal branch of the internal carotid • the lateral surface of the frontal,
artery. It is connected to the opposite anterior cerebral artery by the anterior
parietal, and upper temporal lobes
communicating artery, completing the anterior part of the circle of Willis. The
anterior cerebral artery supplies the medial surface of the frontal and parietal • the posterior limb and genu of the
lobes, which include motor and sensory cortical areas for the pelvis and lower internal capsule
limbs. The anterior cerebral artery also supplies the anterior four fifths of the
• most of the basal ganglia
corpus callosum and approximately 1 inch of the frontal and parietal cortex on the
superior aspect of the lateral aspect of the hemisphere.
Occlusion of the anterior cerebral artery results in spastic paresis of the
contralateral lower limb and anesthesia of the contralateral lower limb. Urinary
incontinence may be present, but this usually occurs only with bilateral damage. A
transcortical apraxia of the left limbs may result from involvement of the anterior
portion of the corpus callosum. A transcortical apraxia occurs because the left
hemisphere (language dominant) has been disconnected from the motor cortex of
the right hemisphere. The anterior cerebral artery also supplies the anterior limb of
the internal capsule.
34
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
NOTE Pericallosal artery
The anterior cerebral Callosomarginal artery
artery (ACA) supplies Splenium
Pharmacologmyedial surface of Biochemistry Corpus
frontal and parietal callosum
lobes; anterior 4/5 of
Posterior cerebral
corpus callosum; artery
Frontal pole
Physiologyanterior limb of MedicalGenetics
internal capsule Cuneus Orbital artery
The posterior cerebral Superior cerebellar Anterior cerebral
artery
artery (PCA) supplies artery
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
occipital lobe; lower Anterior inferior Inferior temporal gyrus
temporal lobe; cerebellar artery
Basilar artery
splenium; midbrain
Vertebral artery
Microbiology
Posterior inferior
CLINICAL cerebellar artery Internal carotid artery
CORRELATE
The most common
aneurysm site in the Figure IIIFig1u0re 7.IIITh1e0 7.DiTsthreibutiDonisstributions ofof tthhee CeCreebrreablral Arteries:ArteriePsa:rt 2 Part 2
circle of Willis is
where the anterior
communicating artery
joins an anterior
cerebral artery.
Circle of Willis
Anterior communicating
Middle cerebral Anterior cerebral
Internal carotid
Superior
Posterior communicating
cerebellar
(lateral pons)
Posterior cerebral
(medial midbrain)
Basilar
Vertebral Paramedian (medial pons)
Anterior inferior
cerebellar (lateral pons)
Anterior spinal
Posterior inferior
(medial medulla)
cerebellar (lateral medulla)
Figure IIIFig1u0re 8.IIIAr1te0rial8. ArteSruiaplply Supplyof othfethe BrBairnain
34
CHAPTER 10 | CEREBRAL CORTEX
Anterior
Cerebral Middle
Artery Cerebral
Artery
Internal
Carotid
Artery
Figure III 10 9. Anteroposterior View of Left Internal Carotid
Figure III 10 9. Anteroposterior View of Left Internal Carotid
Lateral view - Left Lateral view - Right
Calculation Spatial
Wernicke Prosody
finger recognition perception
area centers
Broca Angular
area gyrus
Medial viewInferior view
Splenium of
corpus callosum
Anterior cerebral Posterior cerebral Middle cerebral
artery artery artery
Figure IIIFigu1r0e 1I0I.I 10Terr1it0o.riesTerritories SupSpulipepdlied bybythetheCerebrCalerebralArteries Arteries
34
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
The posterior cerebral artery is formed by the terminal bifurcation of the basilar
artery. The posterior communicating artery arises near the termination of the
internal carotid artery and passes posteriorly to join the posterior cerebral artery.
The posterior communicating arteries complete the circle of Willis by joining the
Pharmacology Biochemistry vertebrobasilar and carotid circulations. The posterior cerebral artery supplies the
occipital and temporal cortex on the inferior and lateral surfaces of the hemisphere,
the occipital lobe and posterior 2/3 of the temporal lobe on the medial surface of
the hemisphere, and the thalamus and subthalamic nucleus.
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Occlusion of the posterior cerebral artery results in a homonymous hemianopia of
the contralateral visual field with macular sparing.
Pathology Table BehIIaIvior1a0lScien1c.e/SCoecriaelbSrocvieansccueslar Disorders
Disorder Types key Concepts
Cerebral Thrombotic Anemic/pale infarct; usually atherosclerotic complication
infarcts
Microbiology Embolic Hemorrhagic/red infarct; from heart or atherosclerotic
plaques; middle cerebral artery most vulnerable to emboli
Hypotension “Watershed” areas and deep cortical layers most affected
Hypertension Lacunar infarcts; basal ganglia, internal capsule, and pons
most affected
Hemorrhages Epidural Almost always traumatic
hematoma
Rupture of middle meningeal artery after skull fracture
Lucid interval before loss of consciousness (“talk and die”
syndrome)
Subdural Usually caused by trauma
hematoma
Rupture of bridging veins (drain brain to dural sinuses)
Subarachnoid Ruptured berry aneurysm is most frequent cause
hemorrhage
Predisposing factors: Marfan syndrome, Ehlers Danlos type 4,
adult polycystic kidney disease, hypertension, smoking
Intracerebral Common causes: hypertension, trauma, infarction
hemorrhage
35
CHAPTER 10 | CEREBRAL CORTEX
Voluntary
contralateral
horizontal gaze Premotor Primary motor
Central sulcus
cortex cortex (area 4)
(Rolando)
Frontal eye field (area 6)
(area 8) Primary somatosensory
cortex (areas 3,1,2)
Somatosensory
association cortex
Visual association
cortex
Broca’s area Primary
(areas 44 & 45) visual cortex
Lateral sulcus Angular gyrus
(Sylvius) (area 39)
Wernicke’s area
Primary auditory
(area 22)
cortex (areas 41 & 42)
Figure III 10 11. Cerebral Cortex: Functional Areas of
Figure III 10 11. Cerebral Cortex: Functional Areas of Left (Dominant) Hemisphere
Left (Dominant) Hemisphere
Frontal Lobe
A large part of the frontal cortex rostral to the central sulcus is related to the
control of movements, primarily on the opposite side of the body. These areas
include primary motor cortex (Brodmann area 4), premotor cortex (area 6), the
frontal eye field (area 8), and the motor speech areas of Broca (area 44 and 45).
Traditionally, area 4 is considered the primary motor cortex. It is in the precentral
gyrus, immediately anterior to the central sulcus, and contains an orderly skeletal
motor map of the contralateral side of the body.
The muscles of the head are represented most ventrally closest to the lateral fissure;
then, proceeding dorsally, are the regions for the neck, upper limb, and trunk on
the lateral aspect of the hemisphere. On the medial aspect of the hemisphere is the
motor representation for the pelvis and lower limb.
Premotor cortex
Just anterior to area 4 is the premotor cortex (area 6). Neurons here are particu
larly active prior to the activation of area 4 neurons, so it is thought that the
premotor cortex is involved in the planning of motor activities. Damage here
results in an apraxia, a disruption of the patterning and execution of learned motor
movements. Individual movements are intact, and there is no weakness, but the
patient is unable to perform movements in the correct sequence.
35
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
CLINICAL CORRELATE Prefrontal cortex
Lesion of the Frontal Eye Field The prefrontal cortex is located in front of the premotor area and represents about
a quarter of the entire cerebral cortex in the human brain. This area is involved in
The frontal eye field lies in front of the motor organizing and planning the intellectual and emotional aspects of behavior, much
Pharmacology Biochemistry
cortex in Brodmann area 8. This cortical as the adjacent premotor cortex is involved in planning its motor aspects.
area is the center for contralateral horizontal
gaze. A lesion here results in an inability to
make voluntary eye movements toward the CLINICAL CORRELATE
Physiology MedicalGenetics
contralateral side. Because the activity of
Lesions in the Prefrontal Area
the intact frontal eye field in the opposite
cortex would also be unopposed after such Lesions in the prefrontal area produce what is called the frontal lobe
a lesion, the result is conjugate slow syndrome. The patient cannot concentrate and is easily distracted; there is a
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
deviation of the eyes toward the side of the general lack of initiative, foresight, and perspective. Another common aspect
lesion. is apathy (i.e., severe emotional indifference). Apathy is usually associated
with abulia, a slowing of intellectual faculties, slow speech, and decreased
If motor cortex is involved in the lesion, the
participation in social interactions. Prefrontal lesions also result in the
Microbiologpyatient may have a contralateral spastic
emergence of infantile suckling or grasp reflexes that are suppressed in adults.
paresis. The intact frontal eye field in the In the suckling reflex, touching the cheek causes the head to turn toward the
opposite hemisphere deviates the eyes away side of the stimulus as the mouth searches for a nipple to suckle. In the grasp
from the paralyzed limbs. reflex, touching the palm of the hand results in a reflex closing of the fingers,
which allows an infant to grasp anything that touches the hand.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Expressive Aphasia
Broca area is just anterior to the motor cortex region that provides upper
motoneuron innervation of cranial nerve motor nuclei. This area in the left
or dominant hemisphere is the center for motor speech and corresponds
to Brodmann areas 44 and 45. Damage to Broca area produces a motor,
nonfluent, or expressive aphasia that reflects a difficulty in piecing together
words to produce expressive speech. Patients with this lesion can understand
written and spoken language but normally say almost nothing. When pressed
on a question such as “What did you do today?” they might reply “Went
town.” The ability to write is usually also affected in a similar way (agraphia)
in all aphasias, although the hand used for writing can be used normally in
all other tasks. Patients are keenly aware of and frustrated by an expressive
aphasia, because of their lack of the ability to verbalize their thoughts orally or
in writing.
Broca area damage often extends posteriorly into the primary motor cortex
and might be combined with a contralateral paralysis of the muscles of the
lower face, resulting in a drooping of the corner of the mouth. If the lesion is
larger, the patient might have a spastic hemiparesis of the contralateral upper
limb.
35
CHAPTER 10 | CEREBRAL CORTEX
Parietal Lobe
Primary somatosensory cortex
The parietal lobe begins just posterior to the central sulcus with the postcentral
gyrus. The postcentral gyrus corresponds to Brodmann areas 3, 1, and 2 and
contains primary somatosensory cortex. Like primary motor cortex, there is a
similar somatotopic representation of the body here, with head, neck, upper limb,
and trunk represented on the lateral aspect of the hemisphere, and pelvis and
lower limb represented medially. These areas are concerned with discriminative
touch, vibration, position sense, pain, and temperature. Lesions in somatosensory
cortex result in impairment of all somatic sensations on the opposite side of the
body, including the face and scalp.
Posterior parietal association cortex
Just posterior and ventral to the somatosensory areas is the posterior parietal
association cortex, including Brodmann areas 5 and 7.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Lesions, usually in the dominant hemisphere and which include areas 5 and
7 of the posterior parietal association areas, often result in apraxia (also seen
with lesions to the premotor cortex). Apraxia is a disruption of the patterning
and execution of learned motor movements. This deficit seems to reflect a lack
of understanding how to organize the performance of a pattern of movements
(i.e., what should be done first, then next, etc.). The patient may be unable, for
example, to draw a simple diagram (constructional apraxia) or describe how
to get from his home to his work.
Another deficit, with lesions of areas 5 and 7 is astereognosis (inability to
recognize objects by touch). There is no loss of tactile or proprioceptive
sensation; rather, it is the integration of visual and somatosensory information
that is impaired. Both apraxia and astereognosia are more common after left
hemisphere damage than in right hemisphere damage. The astereognosia is
usually confined to the contralateral side of the body; in contrast, apraxia
is usually bilateral. Apraxia is probably a result of the loss of input to the
premotor cortex (area 6), which is involved in the actual organization of motor
movements into a goal directed pattern.
Wernicke area
NOTE
The inferior part of the parietal lobe and adjacent part of the temporal lobe in the
Any blockage of the left middle cerebral
dominant (left) hemisphere, known as Wernicke area, are cortical regions that
function in language comprehension. At a minimum, Wernicke area consists of artery that results in an aphasia (Broca
area 22 in the temporal lobe but may also include areas 39 and 40 in the parietal Wernicke, conduction) or Gerstmann
lobe. Areas 39 (the angular gyrus) and 40 (the supramarginal gyrus) are regions of syndrome will also result in agraphia.
convergence of visual, auditory, and somatosensory information.
35
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Receptive Aphasia
Pharmacology Biochemistry Lesions in area 22 in the temporal lobe and area 39 or 40 in the parietal lobe
produce a fluent, receptive, or Wernicke aphasia. The patient with Wernicke
aphasia cannot comprehend spoken language and may or may not be able to
read (alexia) depending on the extent of the lesion. The deficit is characterized
Physiology MedicalGenetics by fluent verbalization but lacks meaning. Patients are paraphasic, often
misusing words as if speaking using a “word salad.”
Patients with Wernicke aphasia are generally unaware of their deficit and show
no distress as a result of their condition.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Gerstmann Syndrome
If the lesion is confined to just the angular gyrus (area 39), the result is a loss
of ability to comprehend written language (alexia) and to write it (agraphia),
Microbiology but spoken language may be understood. Alexia with agraphia in pure angular
gyrus lesions is often seen with 3 other unique symptoms: acalculia (loss of
the ability to perform simple arithmetic problems), finger agnosia (inability
to recognize one’s fingers), and right–left disorientation. This constellation
of deficits constitutes Gerstmann syndrome and underscores the role of this
cortical area in the integration of how children begin to count, add, and
subtract using their fingers.
Conduction Aphasia
There is a large fiber bundle connecting areas 22, 39, and 40 with Broca area
in the frontal lobe, known as the superior longitudinal fasciculus (or the
arcuate fasciculus). A lesion affecting this fiber bundle results in a conduction
aphasia. In this patient, verbal output is fluent, but there are many paraphrases
and word finding pauses. Both verbal and visual language comprehension are
also normal, but if asked to, the patient cannot repeat words or execute verbal
commands by an examiner (such as “Count backwards beginning at 100”)
and also demonstrates poor object naming. This is an example of a disconnect
syndrome in which the deficit represents an inability to send information
from one cortical area to another. As with an expressive aphasia, these patients
are aware of the deficit and are frustrated by their inability to execute a verbal
command that they fully understand.
Transcortical Apraxia
Lesions to the corpus callosum caused by an infarct of the anterior cerebral
artery may result in another type of disconnect syndrome known as a
transcortical apraxia. As in other cases of apraxia, there is no motor weakness,
but the patient cannot execute a command to move the left arm. They
understand the command, which is perceived in the Wernicke area of the
left hemisphere, but the callosal lesion disconnects the Wernicke area from
the right primary motor cortex so that the command cannot be executed.
The patient is still able to execute a command to move the right arm because
Wernicke area in the left hemisphere is able to communicate with the left
primary motor cortex without using the corpus callosum.
35
CHAPTER 10 | CEREBRAL CORTEX
Asomatognosia
The integration of visual and somatosensory information is important for the
formation of the “body image” and awareness of the body and its position in
space. Widespread lesions in areas 7, 39, and 40 in the nondominant right
parietal lobe may result in unawareness or neglect of the contralateral half of
the body, known as asomatognosia. Although somatic sensation is intact, the
patients ignore half of their body and may fail to dress, undress, or wash the
affected (left) side. Patients will have no visual field deficits, so they can see,
but deny the existence of things in the left visual field. Asking them to bisect
a horizontal line produces a point well to the right of true center. If asked to
draw a clock face from memory, they will draw only the numbers on the right
side, ignoring those on the left. Patients may deny that the left arm or leg
belongs to them when the affected limb is passively brought into their field of
vision. Patients may also deny their deficit, an anosognosia.
Occipital Lobe
The occipital lobe is essential for the reception and recognition of visual stimuli
and contains primary visual and visual association cortex.
Visual cortex
The visual cortex is divided into striate (area 17) and extrastriate (areas 18 and 19).
Area 17, also referred to as the primary visual cortex, lies on the medial portion of
the occipital lobe on either side of the calcarine sulcus. Its major thalamic input is
from the lateral geniculate nucleus. Some input fibers are gathered in a thick bundle
that can be visible on the cut surface of the gross brain, called the line of Gennari.
The retinal surface (and therefore the visual field) is represented in an orderly
manner on the surface of area 17, such that damage to a discrete part of area 17 will
produce a scotoma (i.e., a blind spot) in the corresponding portion of the visual
field. A unilateral lesion inside area 17 results in a contralateral homonymous
hemianopsia with macular sparing, usually caused by an infarct of a branch of the
posterior cerebral artery. The area of the macula of the retina containing the fovea is
spared because of a dual blood supply from both the posterior and middle cerebral
arteries. The actual cortical area serving the macula is represented in the most
posterior part of the occipital lobe. Blows to the back of the head or a blockage in
occipital branches of the middle cerebral artery that supply this area may produce
loss of macular representation of the visual fields. Bilateral visual cortex lesions
result in cortical blindness; the patient cannot see, but pupillary reflexes are intact.
Visual association cortex
Anterior to the primary visual or striate cortex are extensive areas of visual
association cortex. Visual association cortex is distributed throughout the entire
occipital lobe and in the posterior parts of the parietal and temporal lobes. These
regions receive fibers from the striate cortex and integrate complex visual input
from both hemispheres. From the retina to the visual association cortex, informa
tion about form and color, versus motion, depth and spatial information are
processed separately. Form and color information is processed by the parvocellu
lar blob system. This “cone stream” originates mainly in the central part of the
retina, relays through separate layers of the lateral geniculate, and projects to blob
zones of primary visual cortex. Blob zones project to the inferior part of the
35
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
temporal lobe in areas 20 and 21. Unilateral lesions here result in achromatopsia, a
complete loss of color vision in the contralateral hemifields. Patients see every
thing in shades of gray. Additionally, these patients may also present with prosop
agnosia, an inability to recognize faces.
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Motion and depth are processed by the magnocellular system. This “rod stream”
originates in the peripheral part of the retina, relays through separate layers of the
lateral geniculate, and projects to thick stripe zones of primary visual cortex.
Striped areas project through the middle temporal lobe to the parietal lobe in areas
Physiology MedicalGenetics
18 and 19. Lesions here result in a deficit in perceiving visual motion; visual fields,
color vision, and reading are unaffected.
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Visual Agnosia
Damage to parts of the temporal lobes involving the cone stream produces
Microbiology
a visual agnosia. Visual agnosia is the inability to recognize visual patterns
(including objects) in the absence of a visual field deficit. For example, you
might show a patient with an object agnosia a pair of glasses, and the patient
would describe them as 2 circles and a bar. Lesions in areas 20 and 21 of the
temporal lobe that also include some destruction of adjacent occipital lobe
in either hemisphere result in prosopagnosia, a specific inability to recognize
faces. The patient can usually read and name objects. The deficiency is an
inability to form associations between faces and identities. On hearing the
voice of the same person, the patient can immediately identify the person.
Alexia Without Agraphia
A principal “higher order” deficit associated with occipital lobe damage is
alexia without agraphia (or pure word blindness). The patients are unable to
read at all and, curiously, often have a color anomia (inability to name colors).
However, they are able to write. This is another example of a disconnect
syndrome in which information from the occipital lobe is not available to the
parietal or frontal lobes to either understand or express what has been seen.
(Recall that alexia with agraphia—inability to read or write—occurs with
lesions encompassing the angular gyrus in the dominant parietal lobe.)
The cause of the syndrome is usually an infarction of the left posterior
cerebral artery that affects not only the anterior part of the occipital lobe
but the splenium of the corpus callosum. Involvement of the left occipital
cortex results in a right homonymous hemianopsia with macular sparing.
Involvement of the splenium of the corpus callosum prevents visual
information from the intact right occipital cortex from reaching language
comprehension centers in the left hemisphere. Patients can see words in the
left visual field but do not understand what the words mean.
35
CHAPTER 10 | CEREBRAL CORTEX
Temporal Lobe
Primary auditory cortex
On its superior and lateral aspect, the temporal lobe contains the primary auditory
cortex. Auditory cortex (areas 41 and 42) is located on the 2 transverse gyri of
Heschl, which cross the superior temporal lobe deep within the lateral sulcus.
Much of the remaining superior temporal gyrus is occupied by area 22 (auditory
association cortex), which receives a considerable projection from both areas 41
and 42 and projects widely to both parietal and occipital cortices.
Patients with unilateral damage to the primary auditory cortex show little loss of
auditory sensitivity but have some difficulty in localizing sounds in the contralat
eral sound field. Area 22 is a component of Wernicke area in the dominant
hemisphere, and lesions here produce a Wernicke aphasia.
Corpus
callosum
Lateral
Anterior ventricle
limb
Internal Genu
capsule
Third
Posterior
ventricle
limb
Optic
radiations
Figure FiguIrIeI 10III 1120. 12In.ternInalternal CCapaspusluel:e: ArtAerritaelrial SupplySupply
Table III 10 2. Internal Capsule: Arterial Supply
Internal
Arterial Supply Tracts
Capsule
Anterior Medial striate Thalamocortical
limb br. of ACA
Genu Lenticulostriate Corticobulbar
br. of MCA
Posterior Lenticulostriate Corticospinal, all somatosensory
limb br. of MCA thalamocortical projections
Note: The posterior cerebral artery also supplies the optic radiations.
Abbreviations: ACA, anterior cerebral artery; MCA, middle cerebral artery
35
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Transcortical Apraxia Alexia Without Agraphia
Resulting from occlusion of Resulting from occlusion of
Microbiology the anterior cerebral artery the left posterior cerebral artery
3. Left arm cannot be Language area in
moved in response to communication
the verbal command with the motor
cortex (both sides)
Left motor
cortex
Wernicke area Right
motor
and angular gyrus
cortex
1. Verbal
Corpus
command to
callosum Left visual cortex
move the left arm
(lesion)—cannot
interpreted here Right visual
process any
cortex
visual information
2. Right motor cortex is Visual information from right visual
disconnected from the cortex blocked by lesion—cannot
left cortex by the lesion get to language area
in the corpus callosum Result: Alexia
Anterior cerebral artery Posterior cerebral artery
Figure III 10 13. Disconnect Syndromes
Figure III 10 13. Disconnect Syndromes
35
CHAPTER 10 | CEREBRAL CORTEX
Table III 10 3. CNS Blood Supply and Stroke related Deficits
System Primary Arteries Branches Supplies Deficits after Stroke
Vertebrobasilar Vertebral Anterior spinal Anterior two thirds of Dorsal columns spared; all
(posterior arteries artery spinal cord else bilateral
circulation)
Posterior inferior Dorsolateral medulla See Brain Stem Lesions in
cerebellar (PICA) Chapter IV 5.
Basilar artery Pontine arteries Base of pons
Anterior inferior Inferior cerebellum,
cerebellar artery cerebellar nuclei
(AICA)
Superior cerebellar Dorsal cerebellar
artery hemispheres;
superior cerebellar
peduncle
Labyrinthine artery Inner ear
(sometimes arises
from AICA)
Posterior — Midbrain, thalamus, Contralateral hemianopia
cerebral occipital lobe with macular sparing
arteries
Alexia without agraphia*
Internal Ophthalmic Central artery of Retina Blindness
carotid artery retina
(anterior
Posterior — — Second most common
circulation)
communicating aneurysm site (often with
artery CN III palsy)
Anterior — Primary motor and Contralateral spastic
cerebral artery sensory cortex (leg/ paralysis and anesthesia of
foot) lower limb
Frontal lobe abnormalities
Anterior — — Most common site of
communicating aneurysm
artery
Middle cerebral Outer cortical Lateral convexity of Contralateral spastic
artery hemispheres paralysis and anesthesia of
upper limb/face
Lenticulostriate Internal capsule,
Gaze palsy Aphasia*
caudate, putamen,
globus pallidus Gerstmann syndrome*
Hemi inattention and
neglect of contralateral
body†
*If dominant hemisphere is affected (usually the left)
†Right parietal lobe lesion
35
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Table III 10 4. key Features of Lobes
Lobes Important Regions Deficit After Lesion
Frontal Primary motor and Contralateral spastic paresis (region depends on area of homunculus
Pharmacology premotor Bioccohretemxistry affected), premotor: apraxia
Frontal eye fields Eyes deviate to ipsilateral side
Broca speech area* Broca aphasia (expressive, nonfluent aphasia): patient can understand
written and spoken language, but speech and writing are slow and
Physiology (Areas 44M,edical4G5)enetics
effortful; patients are aware of their problem; often associated with right
arm weakness and right lower face weakness.
Prefrontal cortex Frontal lobe syndrome: symptoms can include poor judgment, difficulty
concentrating and problem solving, apathy, inappropriate social behavior
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Parietal Primary Contralateral hemihypesthesia (region depends on area of homunculus
somatosensory cortex affected)
Superior parietal Contralateral astereognosis/apraxia
Microbiology lobule
Inferior parietal lobule Gerstmann syndrome (if dominant hemisphere): right/left confusion,
alexia, dyscalculia and dysgraphia, finger agnosia, contralateral hemiano
(Angular gyrus;
pia or lower quadrantanopia; unilateral neglect (nondominant)
Area 39)
Temporal Primary auditory Bilateral damage → deafness
cortex
Unilateral leads to slight hearing loss
Wernicke area* Wernicke aphasia (receptive, fluent aphasia): patient cannot understand
any form of language; speech is fast and fluent, but not comprehensible
(Area 22)
Hippocampus Bilateral lesions lead to inability to consolidate short term to long term
memory
Amygdala Klüver Bucy syndrome: hyperphagia, hypersexuality, visual agnosia
Olfactory bulb, tract, Ipsilateral anosmia
primary cortex
Meyer loop (visual Contralateral upper quadrantanopia (“pie in the sky”)
radiations)
Occipital Primary visual cortex Cortical blindness if bilateral; macular sparing hemianopia
*In the dominant hemisphere. Eighty percent of people are left hemisphere dominant.
36
11 #
Limbic System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Solve problems concerning general features
❏ Solve problems concerning olfactory system
❏ Demonstrate understanding of limbic system
The limbic system is not organ based, but rather a group of brain structures that
work together to modulate emotion, memory, attention, feeding, and mating
behaviors. It plays a role in feelings such as fear, anxiety, happiness, sexual plea
sure, and familiarity. It consists of a core of cortical and diencephalic structures NOTE
found on the medial aspect of the hemisphere.
The hippocampus is characterized by a
A prominent structure in the limbic system is the hippocampal formation on the 3 layered cerebral cortex.
medial aspect of the temporal lobe, which:
• Extends along the floor of the inferior horn of the lateral ventricle in the
temporal lobe
• Includes the hippocampus, the dentate gyrus, the subiculum, and adjacent
entorhinal cortex
Other limbic related structures include the following:
• Amygdala, located deep in the medial part of the anterior temporal lobe
rostral to the hippocampus
• Septal nuclei, located medially between the anterior horns of the lateral
ventricle
The limbic system is interconnected with the thalamic and hypothalamic struc
tures, including the anterior and dorsomedial nuclei of the thalamus and the
mammillary bodies of the hypothalamus. The cingulate gyrus (the main limbic
cortical area) is located on the medial surface of each hemisphere above the corpus
callosum.
Limbic related structures also project to wide areas of the prefrontal cortex.
OLFACTORY SYSTEM
Central projections of olfactory structures reach parts of the temporal lobe without
a thalamic relay and the amygdala. The olfactory nerve consists of numerous
fascicles of the central processes of bipolar neurons, which reach the anterior
cranial fossa from the nasal cavity through openings in the cribriform plate of the
36
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
ethmoid bone. These primary olfactory neurons differ from other primary sensory
neurons in 2 ways.
• The cell bodies of these neurons, which lie scattered in the olfactory
Pharmacology Biochemistry mucosa, are not collected together in a sensory ganglion.
• Primary olfactory neurons are continuously replaced; the life span of these
cells is 30 120 days in mammals.
Within the mucosa of the nasal cavity, the peripheral process of the primary
Physiology MedicalGenetics
olfactory neuron ramifies to reach the surface of the mucous membrane. The
central processes of primary olfactory neurons terminate by synapsing with
neurons found in the olfactory bulb. The bulb is a 6 layered outgrowth of the brain
that rests on the cribriform plate. Olfactory information entering the olfactory
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences bulb undergoes a great deal of convergence before the olfactory tract carries axons
from the bulb to parts of the temporal lobe and amygdala.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Alzheimer disease results from neurons,
Microbiology CLINICAL CORRELATE
beginning in the hippocampus, that exhibit
neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid plaques. Olfactory deficits are caused by transport problems or by damage to the
Other nuclei affected are the cholinergic primary olfactory neurons or to neurons in the olfactory pathway to the CNS.
neurons in the nucleus basalis of Meynert, Head injuries that fracture the cribriform plate can tear the central processes
of olfactory nerve fibers as they pass through the plate to terminate in the
noradrenergic neurons in the locus
olfactory bulb, or they may injure the bulb itself. Because the olfactory bulb
coeruleus, and serotonergic neurons in the
is an outgrowth of the CNS covered by meninges, separation of the bulb
raphe nuclei.
from the plate may tear the meninges, resulting in CSF leaking through the
Patients with Down syndrome commonly cribriform plate into the nasal cavity.
present with Alzheimer in middle age
Olfactory deficits may be incomplete (hyposmia), distorted (dysosmia), or
because chromosome 21 is one site of a
complete (anosmia).
defective gene.
Papez Circuit
A summary of the simplified connections of the limbic system is expressed by the
Papez circuit. Arbitrarily, the Papez circuit begins and ends in the hippocampus.
• Axons of hippocampal pyramidal cells converge to form the fimbria and,
finally, the fornix.
• The fornix projects mainly to the mammillary bodies in the hypothala
NOTE
mus. The mammillary bodies, in turn, project to the anterior nucleus of
The Papez circuit oversimplifies the role of the thalamus by way of the mammillothalamic tract.
the limbic system in modulating feelings
• The anterior nuclei project to the cingulate gyrus through the anterior
such as fear, anxiety, sexual pleasure, and
limb of the internal capsule, and the cingulate gyrus communicates with
familiarity, but it is a useful starting point for the hippocampus through the cingulum and entorhinal cortex.
understanding the system.
The amygdala functions to attach an emotional significance to a stimulus and helps
imprint the emotional response in memory.
36
CHAPTER 11 | LIMBIC SYSTEM
Corpus callosum
Cingulate gyrus
Thalamus
Fornix
Olfactory bulb
Mammillary body
Hippocampus Amygdala (deep to uncus)
Cingulate
gyrus
Thalamus (anterior
Hippocampus
nucleus)
via Mammillary
fornix body
Papez Circuit
Figure FigIIuIre 11 III1.11Th1e. TheLimLbimicbic SSyystsetmem and aPnadpez PaCpeirzcuit Circuit
Limbic Structures and Function
• Hippocampal formation (hippocampus, dentate gyrus, the subiculum, and
entorhinal cortex)
• Amygdala
• Septal nuclei
The hippocampus is important in learning and memory. The amygdala attaches an
emotional significance to a stimulus and helps imprint the emotional response
in memory.
Limbic Connections
• The limbic system is interconnected with anterior and dorsomedial nuclei
of the thalamus and the mammillary bodies.
• The cingulate gyrus is the main limbic cortical area.
• Limbic related structures also project to wide areas of the prefrontal cortex.
• Central projections of olfactory structures reach parts of the temporal lobe
and the amygdala.
36
PART III | NEUROSCIENCE
Anatomy Immunology
Papez Circuit
Axons of hippocampal pyramidal cells converge to form the fimbria and, finally,
the fornix. The fornix projects mainly to the mammillary bodies in the
hypothalamus. The mammillary bodies project to the anterior nucleus of the
Pharmacology Biochemistry
thalamus (mammillothalamic tract). The anterior nuclei project to the cingulate
gyrus, and the cingulate gyrus projects to the entorhinal cortex
(via the cingulum). The entorhinal cortex projects to the hippocampus (via the
perforant pathway).
Physiology MedicalGenetics
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences • Anterograde amnesia: bilateral damage to the medial temporal lobes
(including the hippocampus), resulting in a profound loss of the ability to
acquire new information
– Also seen in patients with Korsakoff syndrome (common in alcoholics
Microbiology who have a thiamine deficiency), which often follows an acute presenta
tion of Wernicke encephalopathy (ocular palsy, confusion, and gait
ataxia) (also related to a thiamine deficiency).
– In Wernicke Korsakoff syndrome, lesions are always found in the
mammillary bodies and the dorsomedial nuclei of the thalamus.
– Korsakoff patients also present with retrograde amnesia; patients
confabulate, making up stories to replace past memories they can no
longer retrieve.
• Klüver Bucy syndrome (rare): bilateral lesions of the amygdala and
hippocampus lead to marked placidity, increased “oral exploration,”
hypersexual behavior, and hypermetamorphosis.
Alzheimer Disease
Alzheimer disease accounts for 60% of all cases of dementia; the incidence
increases with age. Alzheimer has an insidious onset, progressive memory
impairment, mood alterations, disorientation, aphasia, apraxia, and progression to
a bedridden state with eventual death. About 5 10% of cases are hereditary, early
onset, and transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait.
Lesions involve the neocortex, hippocampus, and subcortical nuclei, including
forebrain cholinergic nuclei (i.e., basal nucleus of Meynert). These areas show
atrophy, as well as characteristic microscopic changes. The earliest and most
severely affected areas are the hippocampus and temporal lobe, which are involved
in learning and memory.
36
CHAPTER 11 | LIMBIC SYSTEM
Figure III 11 2. MRI of Medial View of the CNS
(a) Corpus callosum (splenium) (b) Lingual gyrus (c) Cuneus gyrus
(d) Primary motor cortex (e) Primary somatosensory cortex (f) Midbrain
(g) Pons (h) Medulla (i) Hypothalamus in wall of third ventricle
(j) Posterior vermis of cerebellum with intracerebral hemorrhage (k) Pituitary
(l) Mammillary body (m) Pineal
36

Index
A Acini Amniotic cavity from epiblast, 8–9
hepatic, 124 Ampulla of uterine tube
Abdomen
pancreas, exocrine, 121, 122 anatomy, 165
aneurysm, 126
salivary glands, 120, 121 fertilization, 7, 168, 169
anterior wall, 85–90
Acoustic neuroma (schwannoma), 244, 306 histology, 170
fluid accumulation, 165
Acromion (radiology), 192 tubal ectopic pregnancy, 8
innervation, 90
Acrosome, 8, 159 Ampulla of Vater, 105, 107, 122, 125
layers, 87, 89
Actin proteins, 14–17 Amygdala
male urine extravasation, 154, 165
Addiction and blood–brain barrier, 242 lesions, 360
planes and regions, 85–86
Adductor longus muscles, 201 Kluver Bucy syndrome, 364
arterial supply, 126–130
Adenohypophysis, 339 limbic system, 361–363
diaphragm boundary, 38
Adie pupil, 329 Amyloid plaques, 362
inguinal region
Adrenal glands (radiology), 175 Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 272, 273
hernias, 92–94
Adrenal hyperplasia, congenital, 147 neurofibrillary tangles, 238
inguinal canal, 90–91
Aganglionic megacolon (Hirschsprung Anal canal, 107, 108
testes descent, 91–92
disease), 103, 109, 231 anal triangle, 152
posterior wall Agraphia, 352–354 fecal material, 118
bony landmarks, 137 alexia without, 356, 358 female perineum, 155
muscles, 137 Alar plate, 225, 226 Anal sphincters, 107–108, 119
radiology, 173–177 Alcohol abuse Anal triangle, 152
barium enema, 173 gait ataxia, 315 female, 155
venous drainage, 130–133 thiamine deficiency, 336, 339, 364 Anastomoses
Abdominal ectopic pregnancy, 8 Alexia, 354 pancreas head, 105, 127, 129
Abdominal reflex, 260 without agraphia, 356, 358 portacaval, 132, 133
Abducens nerves (CN VI) Allantois, 134–137 Anchoring junctions, 16
brain stem, 275–277, 279, 287 Allergies and air intake, 45 Androgen insensitivity, 148
cavernous sinus, 219, 220, 247 Alpha fetoprotein (AFP) levels, 225 Androstenedione, 169
thrombosis, 220 anencephaly, 226, 228 Anencephaly, 226, 228
embryology, 211 spina bifida, 226, 228 Anesthesia
functions, 281 Alpha motoneurons, 254–256, 271 epidural, 27, 29
horizontal conjugate gaze, 297–299 lesions, 260–261 intercostal, 38
lesions, 281, 298, 299, 304, 305 reflexes, 258–260 pudendal, 152
nuclei, 285 5α reductase 2 deficiency, 148 Aneurysms
orbital muscles, 221, 297, 298 Alveoli (lungs) abdominal, 126
vestibular fibers, 293, 294 alveolar ducts, 50 circle of Willis, 221, 348, 359
Abortions and hCG levels, 9 alveolar sacs, 50 superior mesenteric artery, 130
Acalculia, 354 alveolar wall, 52 Angiotensin conversion, 45
Accessory duct of Santorini, 122 capillary diseases, 45 Angular gyrus, 349, 351
Accessory nerves (CN XI) histology, 50–53 lesions, 354, 360
cervical spinal cord, 275–277, 284 hyaline membrane disease, 39 Ankle joints, 205
corticobulbar fibers, 288 macrophages, 51, 53 deep tendon reflex, 258
functions, 281 respiratory bronchioles, 50 Anulus fibrosus, 23, 25
lesions, 281 surfactant, 51, 52 Anopia, 331, 333
nuclei, 284 Alveoli (mammary glands), 172 Anorectal canal, 135, 136
Accommodation convergence reaction, Alzheimer disease, 364 Anosmia, 280, 360, 362
327, 328 amyloid plaques, 362 Anterior cardiac veins, 77
Acetabulum, 202 Down syndrome and, 362 Anterior cerebral arteries, 347–349
Acetylcholine (ACh) intermediate filaments, 15 aneurysm, 348
autonomic and somatic nervous neurofibrillary tangles, 238, 362 occlusion, 347, 354, 358, 359
system, 230 raphe and locus caeruleus, 308 radiology, 349
basal ganglia indirect path, 319 Ambiguus nucleus. See Nucleus ambiguus Anterior communicating arteries
parietal cell secretion, 113 Amenorrhea, 338, 339, 341 aneurysm, 221, 348, 359
Acid–base balance by kidneys, 140 Amnesia, 364 circle of Willis, 301, 348
36
ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Anterior cruciate ligaments (ACL), Arachnoid mater Axonal polyneuropathies, 227, 239
203, 204 cranial, 217, 247 Axons
anterior drawer sign, 204 spinal, 26, 252 axonal transport, 238–239
common injury, 205 Arcuate nuclei, 338–340 axonal polyneuropathies, 227, 239
Anterior scalene muscles, 208 Argyll Robertson pupils, 274, 327, 329 microtubules, 237
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Anterior spinal artery, 348 Arnold Chiari malformation, 228 neurological disorders and, 239
occlusion, 272, 274, 302, 303 Arousal and thalamus, 336, 337 axotomy, 243, 244
Anterior superior iliac spine, 86, 88 Ascending colon, 107 histology, 241–242
Anterior talofibular ligament injury, 205 radiology, 175–176 initial segment, 236, 238
Anterior tibial arteries and fractures, Asomatognosia, 355 regeneration of neuron, 243, 244
Physiology MedicalGenetics
201 Aspiration of foreign body, 43 spinal tracts or fasciculi, 251, 252
Anterograde axonal degeneration, Astereognosia, 264, 353, 360 structure of neuron, 236, 238–239
243, 244 Asthma, 50 Axotomy, 243, 244
Anterolateral sensory system, 262, 263, Astrocytes, 239, 242 Azygos system of veins, 65
265–267, 269 Ataxia of gait, 268, 315
Pathology brain stem, 277, 282 BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Atherosclerotic plaque in aorta, 126 B
Athetosis, 323
lesions, 265–267, 282 Babinski sign, 260, 261
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH), 338, 340 Atlas, 22 Barium enema radiology, 173
Atonic bladder, 138, 272
Antrum of follicle, 166, 168 Bartholin glands, 153
Atria
Anus, 107 Basal cells, 48
Microbiology anatomy of heart, 70
embryology, 135 Basal ganglia
blood flow, 72
sphincters anatomy, 317
borders, 69, 70
defecation, 107–108, 119 cerebral cortex, 324
surfaces, 70
innervation, 152, 155 sections, 318, 320, 321
embryology
Aorta subthalamus, 338
atrial septal defects, 58–59, 63
abdominal aneurysm, 126 thalamus, 324, 335, 336
atrial septation, 56–58, 72
abdominal branches, 126 direct pathway, 317, 319
fetal circulation, 54–56
atherosclerotic plaque site, 126 lesions, 323–324
heart tube, 53, 54
coarctation of, 67–68 diseases of, 322–324
radiology, 81, 84
descending aorta, 64 indirect pathway, 318–319
esophagus and, 64
radiology, 83, 84 lesions, 323–324
Atrioventricular nodal artery, 76, 77
radiology Basal lamina, 16, 17
Atrioventricular (AV) node, 78, 79
abdomen, 174–176 Basal plate, 225, 226
Atrioventricular valves
thorax, 83, 84 Basement membrane, 15, 16
auscultation, 74, 75
Aortic arch bullous pemphigoid, 16
blood flow, 72, 73
radiological landmark, 66, 81, 82 Basilar arteries, 301, 346, 348, 350
murmurs, 74–76
superior mediastinum, 66 medial pontine syndrome, 304
Auditory system, 291–293
Aortic hiatus, 64, 65, 80 occlusion, 359
auditory tests, 293
Aorticopulmonary septum, 60, 61 cerebral cortex, 351, 357, 360 Basis pontis, 278
Aortic semilunar valve Basket cells, 311–313
hearing loss, 291, 292
aortic insufficiency, 74, 75 pitch of sound, 290, 291 Bell palsy, 289, 291
aortic stenosis, 74, 75 thalamus, 336, 337 Bicuspid valve
auscultation, 74, 75 auscultation, 74, 75
Auerbach’s plexus, 109, 110
blood flow, 73 Auricle of heart, 72 blood flow, 72, 73
murmurs, 74–76 Auscultation murmurs, 74–76
Aortic vestibule, 54, 73 breath sounds, 43 Bilaminar embryonic disk, 8–9
Apathy, 352 heart valves, 74, 75 Bile, 125
“Ape hand,” 185–187, 190 Autonomic nervous system, 30–33, 225, Bile canaliculi, 123
Bile duct, 105, 123
Apex of lung, 42 230–233, nervous system
Bladder
Aphasias, 347, 352–354, 360 See also Parasympathetic nervous
anatomy, 137, 138
Appendix, 107 system; Sympathetic
atonic, 138
Apraxia, 347, 351, 353, 360 Avascular necrosis, 193, 202
embryology, 136
transcortical, 354, 358 Axillary arteries, 188, 189
exstrophy of, 148
APUD cells (Amino Precursor Uptake Axillary lymph nodes, 36
female pelvis, 151
Decarboxylase) Axillary nerves
herniation into vagina, 152
gastrointestinal, 114 brachial plexus, 179–181
respiratory, 48, 49 humeral head dislocation, 187, 191 male pelvis, 150
Aqueous humor, 326 humeral surgical neck fracture, 186, 187, spastic, 138
ciliary body epithelium, 328 192 trigone, 136, 138
glaucoma, 326 injury, 183, 184 Blastocyst, 7, 8
Arachnoid granulations, 217, 218, lesions, 186, 187 Blastomeres, 7, 8
245–247, 249 Axis of vertebral column, 22 Blastula, 7, 8
Blepharospasm, 32
368
INDEX
Blindness hypothalamic fibers, 277–280, 282 Calculus, biliary, 125
cortical blindness, 355, 360 lesions, 303–305 Caloric test, 295, 296
night blindness, 325 midbrain, 287 Camper fascia, 87
psychic blindness, 364 pons, 284 Canal of Schlemm, 326
Blood–brain barrier lesions, 282, 302–308 narrow angle glaucoma, 326
about, 242, 247, 249 diagnosis of, 307 Cancers
astrocytes, 239, 242 medial lemniscus, 263–265, 277, 282 breast, 172
choroid plexus, 247, 249 medial longitudinal fasciculus, 278, 279, mastectomy nerve lesion, 35
drugs of addiction crossing, 242 282 metastasis, 36
pericytes, 240, 242 reticular formation, 308 orange peel appearance, 35
Blood pressure control by kidneys, 140 spinothalamic tract, 265–267, 282 bronchial from K cells, 49
Bowel ischemia at splenic flexure, 130 upper motoneurons, 256 epithelial cadherins and malignancy,
Bowman’s capsule, 141 corticospinal tract, 257 15, 16
renal corpuscle, 141, 142–144, 146 Breasts lung, 45
Brachial arteries, 188, 189 anatomy, 35–36 apex of lung, 42
cancer, 172
Brachial plexus, 179–181 metastasis, 44
cervical spinal nerves, 251, 253 mastectomy nerve lesion, 35 lymphatic system metastasis
metastasis, 36
collateral nerves, 182 breast, 36
orange peel appearance, 35
injuries, 183–184 internal vertebral venous plexus, 27
histology, 172
branches, 185–187 lung, 44
Bridging veins, 217, 218
scalene triangle, 207, 208 penis and scrotum, 91
subdural hematoma, 221, 350
Brachiocephalic veins, 66 testes, 91
Broad ligament, 152
radiology, 82 mesothelioma, 45
Broca’s motor speech area
Brain mitotic spindle inhibition, 15
anatomy, 320
anatomy, 276, 344, 363 nervous system
lesions, 352, 354, 360
arterial supply, 300–301 cerebrospinal tumors, 249
Brodmann numbers, 345
anterior cerebral infarcts, 347, 354, 358, craniopharyngioma, 244
cerebral cortex functional areas, 351
359 glioma, 239
motor pathways, 256, 336–337, 345, 351
cerebral cortex, 346–350 metastatic tumors, 244
Broca area, 352
cerebral infarcts, 350, 359 Schwannoma, 244, 306
sensory pathways, 262, 337, 345
hemorrhages, 350, 359 pancreas, 105
auditory system, 292, 357
posterior cerebral infarcts, 332, 350, 355, parotid salivary glands, 121
parietal lobe, 353–355
356, 358, 359 penis, metastasis, 91
visual system, 297, 332, 351, 352,
blood–brain barrier, 242, 247, 249 pineal body, 306, 308, 341
355–356
astrocytes, 239, 242 scrotum, metastasis, 91
Wernicke area, 353
choroid plexus, 247, 249 testes, metastasis, 91
Bronchi
drugs of addiction crossing, 242 thymoma, 64
aspiration of foreign body, 43
pericytes, 240, 242 cancer from K cells, 49 Capacitation, 8
central nervous system definition, 225 Capillaries
embryology, 36–38
cranial meninges, 217–218 histology, 46, 49 alveolus, 51
embryology, 225, 226 Bronchiole histology, 46, 49–50 lung diseases, 45
lesion diagnosis, 307 kidneys
Bronchomediastinal lymph nodes, 44
radiology, 320, 349, 365 Bronchopulmonary lymph nodes, 44 blood circulation, 140
schwannoma, 244, 306 Brown Sequard syndrome, 271–273 renal corpuscle, 141, 142–144
ventricles Brunner glands, 110, 116 Capitate, 193
anatomy, 245, 246 Brush cells, 48, 49 Capitulum of humerus (radiology), 192
cerebrospinal fluid, 245, 246 (See also Buck fascia, 153 Caput medusae, 132, 133
Cerebrospinal fluid) Bulb of penis, 150, 154 Cardiac conduction system, 78–79
embryology, 227 injury and urine extravasation, 154, 165 intercalated discs, 74
ependymal cells, 242 superficial perineal pouch, 153 Purkinje fibers, 74, 78, 79
hydrocephalus, 228, 248 Bulbospongiosus muscle, 153 septomarginal trabecula, 73, 79
vesicle embryology, 225, 227 ejaculation, 164 Cardiac impression, 42
Brain stem Bulbourethral glands, 150, 154, 156 Cardiac muscle histology, 73–74
anatomy, 275–277 deep perineal pouch, 153 Cardiac tamponade, 69
medulla, 282–284 ejaculation, 164 Cardinal veins, 54
midbrain, 287–289 Bullous pemphigoid, 16 Carina, 67
pons, 284–287 Bundle of His, 77–79 Carotid arteries (radiology), 82
sections, 278–280 Carpal tunnel, 190
arterial supply, 300–301 C median nerve lesions, 186, 187
caloric test of function, 295, 296 Cadherins, 15, 16 syndrome, 190, 193
corticospinal tract, 277, 282 Calcium sensory loss, 183, 190
cranial nerves, 275–281 (See also Cranial adhesion molecules, 15 Cauda equina, 27, 251, 253
nerves) gap junction movement, 16 Caudate nucleus, 318, 320, 321
36
ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Caval hiatus, 80 Cerebral aqueduct ependymal cells, 242
Cavernous sinuses, 219, 220, 247 anatomy, 276, 278, 344 Kartagener syndrome, 18, 48
thrombosis, 220 cerebrospinal fluid circulation, 245, 246 ovum transport and, 170
Cecum, 107 hydrocephalus, 228, 248 microtubules, 15, 18
embryology, 98 embryology, 227 respiratory system, 48
Pharmacology Biochemistry
fecal material, 118 lesions, 306, 308 ciliated columnar cells, 18,
Celiac artery, 126–128 midbrain, 287 46, 49
Cell adhesion, 15, 16 Cerebral cortex Ciliary body epithelium, 328
Cell junctions, 16–18 anatomy, 343–346 Ciliary muscles, 326, 328
Cellular transport systems frontal lobe, 351–352, 360 Cingulate gyrus
Physiology MedicalGenetics
epithelial, 13–14 functional areas, 351 brain anatomy, 276
gap junctions, 16–17 neocortex, 344–346 limbic system, 361, 363, 364
ovarian follicles, 167 occipital lobe, 355–356, 360 Papez circuit, 362, 363
microtubules, 15 parietal lobe, 353–355, 360 Circadian rhythms, 338, 340, 341
Central nervous system temporal lobe, 357, 360 Circle of Willis, 301, 346–348, 350
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
autonomic nervous system, 30–33, 225, arterial supply, 346–350 aneurysm site, 221, 348, 359
230–233 (See also Parasympathetic cerebral infarcts, 350 Circumflex artery, 76, 77
nervous system; Sympathetic hemorrhages, 350 Circumvallate papillae, 213
nervous system) basal ganglia pathways, 324 Cirrhotic liver diseases, 15
cancers corticospinal tract, 256, 257 Clara cells, 49–50
Microbiologycerebrospinal tumor cells, 249 dominant hemisphere, 346 cystic fibrosis and, 49
craniopharyngioma, 244 embryology, 227 Clarke’s nucleus, 252, 255, 271
glioma, 239 language, 346 dorsal spinocerebellar tract cell bodies,
metastatic tumors, 244 lesions, 350 267, 268
Schwannoma, 244, 306 sensory systems, 262–264, 266 Clasp knife reflex, 259, 261
definition, 225 upper motoneurons, 256 Clavicle (radiology), 192
diseases, 237 Cerebral peduncles, 276, 278 “Claw hand,” 184, 186, 187
embryology, 225–229 lesions, 306 Cleavage of zygote, 7, 8
congenital malformations, 228 midbrain, 287 Cleft lip, 213
ectoderm origins, 10, 12, 225 Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), 249 Cleft palate, 214
vesicles, 225, 227 arachnoid granulations, 217, 218, 245–247 Climbing fibers, 310, 312
glial and supporting cells, chemistry of, 249 circuitry, 312, 313–314
239–240 choroid plexus as source, 242, 245–247, Clitoris
histology of neurons, 235–240 249 embryology, 136, 147
immune system and microglia, 240 circulation, 245–247, 249 female genitalia, 151, 155
radiology cribriform plate fractures, 215, 362 Cloaca embryology, 96
brain, 320, 349, 365 hydrocephalus, 228, 248 Cloacal membrane, 10, 136
spinal cord, 83, 84 lumbar puncture, 27, 29 Coarctation of the aorta, 67–68
ventricles pineal body tumors, 341 Coccyx, 22, 88
anatomy, 245, 246 polymorphonuclear leukocytes in, 249 Cochlear ducts, 290, 291
cerebrospinal fluid, 245, 246 (See also subarachnoid space, 27, 218 Cochlear nuclei, 285, 291, 292
Cerebrospinal fluid) Cervical enlargement, 253 lesions, 292, 305
embryology, 227 Cervical parietal pleura, 40 Colchicine, 15
ependymal cells, 242 Cervical vertebrae, 22 Collateral circulation
hydrocephalus, 228, 248 Cervix, 151, 170 macula, 332, 350, 355, 359
Central retinal artery occlusion, 332 Chain motor ganglia, 30 marginal artery, 129
Central sulcus (of Rolando), 343, Chief cells of stomach, 114 pancreas head, 105, 127, 129
344, 351 Chordae tendineae, 72, 73 upper limbs, 189, 190
Centroacinar cells, 122 Chorda tympani, 213 Collateral ligament of ankle, 205
Centromeres in meiosis, 4, 5 Chordoma, 11 Collateral motor ganglia, 30
Cerebellar peduncles Chorea, 322, 323 Collecting ducts, 139, 141, 145
anatomy, 277–279, 309 Chorion, 9 Colles’ fascia, 153
input and outflow, 310, 314, 315 Chorionic cavity, 9 Colon, 107–108
lesions, 305 Choroid (eye), 326, 330 colonic aganglionosis, 103, 109
pons, 284 Choroid plexus, 242, 245–247, 249 embryology
Cerebellum blood–brain barrier, 247, 249 midgut boundary, 107
anatomy, 309–310 Chromaffin cells, 225 midgut rotation, 98
cerebral hemispheres, 344 Chromatolysis, 243 fecal material, 118
circuitry, 313–315 Chromosomes, 3–5 histology, 110, 111
cytoarchitecture, 310–315 Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease peritoneal membranes, 100
thalamus, 336 (COPD), 50 radiology, 173–176
Cilia, 18 Colonic aganglionosis (Hirschsprung
embryology, 227, 309
lesions, 264, 313, 315 ductuli efferentes, 161 disease), 103, 109, 23
370
INDEX
Common bile duct, 104–105, 125 Corpus albicans, 166, 169 functions, 280
hepatopancreatic ampulla, 105, 107, 122, Corpus callosum lesions, 280
125 anatomy, 276, 318, 320, 344 nuclei, 287
Common carotid arteries, 209 lesions, 347, 354, 356 orbital muscles, 221
embryology, 211 radiology, 365 vestibular fibers, 293, 294
Common fibular nerves, 195, 196 Corpus cavernosum V trigeminal
injury, 198 clitoris, 155 brain stem, 275–280, 287
Common hepatic artery, 127, 128 penis, 150, 154, 156 cavernous sinus, 219, 220, 247
Common hepatic duct, 105, 125 erection, 164 corticobulbar fibers, 288, 289
Common iliac arteries, 126 Corpus luteum, 166, 168–169 embryology, 211
Communicating junctions. See Gap Corpus spongiosum, 150, 154, 156 functions, 280
junctions erection, 164 lesions, 280, 303–305
Compartment syndrome, 201 Cortical blindness, 355, 360 medulla, 283
Complete androgen insensitivity, 148 Corticobulbar fibers, 288–289 nuclei, 285–286
Conduction aphasia, 354 cerebellar efferents, 315 VI abducens
Cones, 325, 330 lesions, 306, 307 brain stem, 275–277, 279, 287
cone stream, 355–356 neocortex, 346 cavernous sinus, 219, 220, 247
visual agnosia, 356 Corticospinal tracts cavernous sinus thrombosis, 220
fovea, 326 anatomy, 256, 257, 269, 271 embryology, 211
Confluence of sinuses, 218, 219, 247 brain stem, 277–279, 282 functions, 281
Congenital abnormalities medulla, 282 horizontal conjugate gaze, 297–299
adrenal hyperplasia, 147 pons, 284 lesions, 281, 298, 299, 304, 305
annular pancreas, 102 cerebellar efferents, 314, 315 nuclei, 285
diaphragmatic hernia, 38, 80 lesions, 257, 260, 261, 282, 302, 304, 305, orbital muscles, 221, 297, 298
gut tube abnormalities, 102–103 307 vestibular fibers, 293, 294
heart and circulatory neocortex, 346 VII facial
atrial septal defects, 58–59, 63 Costal groove, 38 brain stem, 275–277, 279, 287
coarctation of the aorta, 67–68 Costal notching, 67 corticobulbar fibers, 288, 289
patent ductus arteriosus, 60, 63, 68 Costal parietal pleura, 39, 40 embryology, 211
persistent truncus arteriosus, 62, 63 Costal surface of lung, 42 functions, 281
tetralogy of Fallot, 61, 63 Costodiaphragmatic recesses, 40, 41 lesions, 281, 289, 291, 299, 304, 305
transposition of the great vessels, Costomediastinal recess, 41 nuclei, 283, 285
62, 63 Cowper glands. See Bulbourethral glands tongue innervation, 213
ventricular septal defects, 59, 63 Cranial nerves VIII vestibulocochlear
indirect inguinal hernia, 92 I olfactory brain stem, 275–277, 279, 287
nervous system, 228 anatomy, 276, 277 cochlear division, 290, 291
anencephaly, 226 functions, 280 functions, 281
spina bifida, 226 lesions, 280, 360, 362 lesions, 281, 292, 294, 303, 304
pharyngeal apparatus, 215 II optic schwannomas, 244, 306
cleft lip, 214 brain anatomy, 276, 277 vestibular system, 293, 294
cleft palate, 214 eye anatomy, 222 IX glossopharyngeal
renal system, 136–137 functions, 280 brain stem, 275–277, 279
renal agenesis, 38, 136 lesions, 280, 332, 333 dorsal motor nucleus, 283
reproductive system, 147–148 pupillary light reflex, 326, 327 embryology, 211
Conjoint tendon, 88, 89, 91 visual field defects, 331–332 functions, 281
Conjugate gaze, 296–300 visual pathway, 325, 326 lesions, 281, 303
Connexons, 17 III oculomotor nuclei, 283
Constrictor pupillae, 326 brain stem, 275–278, 287 tongue innervation, 213
Conus arteriosus, 54 cavernous sinus, 219, 220, 247 X vagus
Conus medullaris, 27, 251, 253 cavernous sinus thrombosis, 220 brain stem, 275–277, 279
corticobulbar fibers, 288
Convergence accommodation reaction, embryology, 211
327, 328 functions, 280 dorsal motor nucleus, 283
embryology, 211
Cooper ligaments, 35, 36 horizontal conjugate gaze, 297, 298
Coracoid (radiology), 192 lesions, 280, 306, 307, 329 heart innervation, 79
Cornea, 326 nuclei, 287 lesions, 303
nuclei, 283
Corona radiata orbital muscles, 221, 297, 298, 326
acrosome enzymes, 159 pupillary light reflex, 326, 327 superior mediastinum, 66, 67
XI accessory
fertilization, 7 vestibular fibers, 293, 294
graafian follicle, 166, 168 IV trochlear cervical spinal cord, 275–277, 284
Coronary arteries, 76–78 brain stem, 275–278, 287 corticobulbar fibers, 288
functions, 281
Coronary sinus, 72, 77, 78 cavernous sinus, 219, 220, 247
heart embryology, 54, 58 lesions, 281
cavernous sinus thrombosis, 220
Coronoid process of ulna, 192 nuclei, 284
embryology, 211
37
ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
XII hypoglossal Deep face veins, 218, 219 Diploic veins, 218, 247
brain stem, 275–277, 279 Deep fibular nerves, 195, 196, 199 Diploid cells in meiosis, 4, 5
corticobulbar fibers, 288 injury, 198–199 Diplopia, 296
embryology, 211 Deep inguinal ring, 89, 90 Direct inguinal hernias, 92–93
functions, 281 Deep perineal pouch, 152, 153 Disjunction in meiosis, 4, 5
Pharmacology Biochemistry
lesions, 281, 302, 303 pudendal innervation, 155 Distal convoluted tubule, 141, 145
nuclei, 284 Deep tendon reflex, 258–259 Diuretics, 145
tongue innervation, 213 Defecation, 119 DNES cells (Diffuse Neuro Endocrine
brain stem, 275–277 anal sphincters, 107–108, 119 System), 48
lesions, 302–308 innervation, 152, 155 Dominant hemisphere, 346
Physiology MedicalGenetics
embryology, 211 meconium and Hirschsprung disease, 231 Dopamine, 319
jugular foramen syndrome, 217 Deltoid ligament of ankle, 205 Dorsal column–medial lemniscal system,
nuclei Deltoid muscles, 208 262, 263–265
medulla, 283–284 Dendrites, 236, 238 brain stem, 263–265, 277
midbrain, 287–289 Dentate nucleus, 279, 312, 314 brain stem medial lemniscus, 277–280, 282
Pathology BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
pons, 285–286 Denticulate ligaments, 26 lesions in brain stem, 282
parasympathetic nervous system, 32, 33 Descending aorta, 64 lesions of dorsal columns, 264, 265
as peripheral nervous system, 27, 225 radiology, 83, 84 medial lemniscus, 263–265, 271
Craniopharyngioma, 244 Descending colon, 107 Dorsal embryonic mesentery, 95, 97, 98
Cranium, 215–216 radiology, 173–176 Dorsal horn, 254
Microbioloagryterial supply, 209 barium enema, 173 anterolateral system, 265
dural venous sinuses, 218–219 Descending hypothalamic fibers, 282 as sensory, 252–254
hemorrhages, 220–221 brain anatomy, 277–280 spinal cord sections, 269, 270
meninges, 217–218 lesions, 303–305 Dorsal rami, 28, 32, 233, 252
orbital muscles, 221–222 midbrain, 287 Dorsal root of spinal nerve
respiratory pathways, 46 pons, 284 denticulate ligaments, 26
Cremasteric muscle and fascia, 88, 89, 91 Desmosomes, 16–18 dorsal column–medial lemniscal system,
cremasteric reflex, 91, 260 pemphigus vulgaris, 16 263
Cribriform plate Detrusor muscle, 138 dorsal root ganglion
cranium, 215 atonic bladder, 138 anatomy, 28
fractures, 215, 362 male pelvis, 150 dorsal horn, 254
olfactory system, 361, 362 spastic bladder, 138 reflexes, 259
Crista terminalis, 72 Diabetes insipidus, 338, 340 sensory receptors, 262–266
Crossover in meiosis, 4, 5 Diabetes mellitus reflexes, 259
Cryptorchidism, 91, 148 infants of diabetic mothers, 39, 52 as sensory, 28, 252, 253, 262
Crypts of Lieberkuhn, 110, 115, 117, 118 neuropathies, 227, 239 Dorsal spinocerebellar tract, 267,
Cumulus oophorus, 166, 168 Diaphragm, 79–80 268, 271
Cuneocerebellar tract, 267, 268 aortic hiatus, 64, 65 Down syndrome
Cuneus gyrus, 331, 332 apertures, 80 alpha fetoprotein levels, 225
lesions, 333 diaphragmatic hernia, 80 Alzheimer disease and, 362
radiology, 365 diaphragmatic parietal pleura, 39, 40 neurofibrillary tangles, 238
Cyanotic conditions embryology, 80 Drawer signs, 204
persistent truncus arteriosus, 62, 63 innervation, 79, 80 Duct of Gartner embryology, 147
pulmonary hypertension causing, 59 pain referral, 80 Ductuli efferentes, 161
right to left shunts, 58, 59, 61–63 pulmonary hypoplasia and, 38 Ductus arteriosus
tetralogy of Fallot, 61, 63 radiology, 81, 174–175 fetal circulation, 55, 56
transposition of the great vessels, 62, 63 sliding hiatal hernia, 106 patent ductus arteriosus, 60
Cystic artery, 127, 128 thoracic outlet, 38 pharyngeal arches, 211
Cystic duct, 105, 125 Diaphragmatic surface of lung, 42 Ductus deferens
Cystic fibrosis, 48 Diastole in valvular defects, 74–76 ejaculation, 164
Clara cells, 49 Diencephalon embryology, 134
epithelial transport, 14 anatomy, 335–341 histology, 162, 163
Cytokinesis, 15 embryology, 227 male anatomy, 150, 154, 156
Cytoskeletal elements, 14–15 DiGeorge sequence, 212, 215 spermatic cord, 91
Cytotrophoblast, 7–9 Digestion vasectomy, 162
bile functions, 125 Ductus venosus, 54–56
D kidney reabsorptive functions, 140 Duodenum, 106–107
large intestine, 119 bile delivery, 125
Dandy Walker malformation, 228
salivary glands, 120–121 digestion, 116
Decerebrate rigidity, 260
small intestine, 115–117 duodenal atresia, 103
Decorticate rigidity, 260
stomach, 112 foregut boundary, 107
Decussation of the pyramids, 256, 257,
Dihydrotestosterone (DHT), 3 histology, 110, 111, 114–118
271, 280
Dilator pupillae, 326 peritoneal membranes, 10
Deep cerebellar nuclei, 311–312
372
INDEX
radiology, 173, 176 fetal circulation, 54–56 ectoderm, 10
ulcer and gastroduodenal artery, 127 first week, 7–8 extraembryonic mesoderm, 9
Dural sac, 26, 27 gastrointestinal system gastrulation, 10
Dural venous sinuses, 218–219, 247–248 foregut rotation, 95, 96 Epicardium, 74
Dura mater midgut rotation, 99 Epididymis, 156, 162
cranial, 217, 247 organ development, 95–97, 101–102 ejaculation, 164
arachnoid granulations, 217, 247 peritoneum, 98–99 microvilli, 17
dural venous sinuses, 218–219, 247 primitive gut tube, 94, 95 vasectomy, 162
spinal, 26, 252 gastrulation, 10 Epidural anesthesia, 27, 29
Dust cells, 53 gonads, 3, 4, 91, 147 Epidural hematoma, 220–221, 350
Dynein extraperitoneal connective tissue, 89 epidural space, 218
cilia, 18 mesonephric tubules, 134, 136 middle meningeal artery laceration, 209
Kartagener syndrome, 18, 48 vagina, 136, 147 Epidural space
retrograde axonal transport, 15, 239 head and neck, 210–215 cranial, 218
spermatozoa flagella, 159 heart spinal, 26, 27
Dysdiadochokinesia, 315 atrial septation, 56–59 epidural anesthesia, 27, 29
Dyskinesias, 323 fetal circulation, 54–56 lumbar puncture, 27, 29
Dysmetria, 315 heart tube, 53 Epigastrium, 86
Dystonia, 323 heart tube derivatives, 54, 72 foregut referred pain, 95
heart tube septation, 56–63 Epiploic foramen (of Winslow), 97, 99–101
E Epispadias, 148
truncus arteriosus septation, 60–63
Ears ventricular septation, 59 Epithalamus, 338, 341
anatomy, 290–292 nervous system, 225–226 Epithelia
basement membrane, 16
inner ear stereocilia, 17 ectoderm origins, 10, 12, 225
auditory system, 291–293 respiratory system, 36–38 embryology
auditory tests, 293 corticosteroids and surfactant, 52 gastrulation, 10
germ layer derivatives, 10, 12, 229
hearing loss, 291, 292 second week, 8–9
embryology, 211, 212 third to eighth weeks, 10–12 respiratory, 36
middle ear diseases, 291 heart, 53, 57, 59, 60 yolk sac derivatives, 12
vestibular system, 293–296 kidney, 134 histology, 13–14
Ectoderm neurulation, 225 cell adhesion molecules, 15
cell surface specializations, 16–18
derivatives, 10, 12, 229 respiratory system, 36
pharyngeal arch derivatives, 211 urorectal septum, 135 connective tissue alongside, 14
epiblast origins, 10 urinary system, 134–136 cytoskeletal elements, 14–15
gastrulation, 10 kidneys, 97, 134–135 heart, 74
nervous system, 10, 12, 225 vertebral column, 21 polarity, 13–14
pectinate line, 108 Embryonic disk, 8–9 hepatocytes, 123
pharyngeal grooves, 210 Emissary veins, 218, 219, 247 tight junctions, 13, 16
primitive gut tube, 96 Emphysema, 50 as tissue type, 13, 14
Ectopic pregnancy, 8, 170 Endocardial cushions, 57, 59 Erb Duchenne palsy, 183–184
hCG levels, 9 Endocardium, 74 Erection of penis, 164
Edinger Westphal nuclei, 287 Endocrine functions of kidney, 139, 145, 146 hypothalamic lesions, 338, 341
accommodation, 327, 328 Endoderm Erythrocytes and vitamin B12, 113
pupillary light reflex, 326, 327 derivatives, 12, 229 Erythropoietin, 139, 145
Eisenmenger complex, 59 gastrulation, 10 Esophageal atresia, 37
Ejaculate, 163, 164 liver, 101, 122 Esophageal hiatus, 80
Ejaculation, 164 pancreas, 101 esophageal hiatal hernia, 80
Ejaculatory ducts, 150, 156, 163 pectinate line, 108 sliding hiatal hernia, 106
ejaculation, 164 pharyngeal pouches, 210 Esophageal varices, 132, 133
embryology, 134, 136, 147 primitive gut tube, 96 Esophageal vein anastomoses, 132, 133
Elbow derivatives, 95 Esophagus
deep tendon reflex, 258 epithelia, 94 embryology, 36–38
median nerve lesion, 185 respiratory system, 36 primitive gut tube, 96
musculocutaneous nerve lesion, 186 urogenital sinus, 136 histology, 110–112
radial nerve lesion, 185 bladder, 136 portacaval anastomoses, 132, 133
radiology, 192 Endolymph, 290, 291, 294 radiology, 82, 84
ulnar nerve lesion, 186 Endometrium, 165, 170, 171 left atrium and, 64
Electrolyte balance by kidneys, 140 Enterocytes, 115, 117, 119 superior mediastinum, 66, 67
Emboliform nucleus, 312, 314 Enteroendocrine cells tracheoesophageal fistula, 37, 38
Embryoblast, 7, 8–9 gastrointestinal, 114, 117 Estradiol from granulosa cells, 167
Embryology respiratory, 48, 49 Estrogen
diaphragm, 80 Ependymal cells, 242 granulosa lutein cells, 169
embryonic mesentery derivatives, 95 Epiblast, 8–9 ovary embryology, 3
37
ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Eustachian tube, 290, 291 hip joint, 202 Fornix
Eversion loss in foot, 198, 199 knee joints, 203–205 brain anatomy, 276, 344
Expressive aphasia, 352 deep tendon reflex, 258–259 basal ganglia section, 321
External abdominal oblique muscle, 87, injuries, 203–205 Papez circuit, 362, 363
89, 91 radiology, 206 posterior, 151
Pharmacology Biochemistry
External cuneate nucleus, 267, 268 neck fractures, 202 Fossa ovalis, 55, 56, 58, 72
External iliac arteries, 126, 200, 201 Fertilization, 168 Fovea, 326
External spermatic fascia, 87, 89, 91 ectopic pregnancy, 8, 170 Frequency of sound and hearing,
Extraembryonic mesoderm, 9 embryology, 7, 8 290, 291
Extrahepatic biliary atresia, 102 second meiotic division, 168 Friedreich ataxia, 268
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Extraperitoneal connective tissue, 89 Fetal circulation, 54–56 Frontal eye field, 296–298
Extremities. See Lower limbs; Upper limbs Fetal development. See cerebral cortex, 351
Eyes Embryology lesions, 352, 360
movement control, 296–300 Fibrous pericardium, 68–69 Frontal lobe, 351–352, 360
nystagmus, 296 Fibula, 203, 205 anatomy, 344, 351
Pathology caloric test, 295 BehavioralScience/SocialSciences radiology, 206 lesions, 351, 352
vestibular, 294, 296 Fibular collateral ligaments, 203 frontal lobe syndrome, 352, 360
orbital muscles, 221–222 Filiform papillae, 213 motor homunculus, 345, 351
vestibulo ocular reflex, 282, 293, 294 Filum terminale, 27, 253 Fundus (gallbladder), 105, 125
brain stem integrity, 295, 296 Fimbriae, 165, 169 Fundus (stomach), 106, 111
Microbiolovgiysual field defects, 331–333 Finger agnosia, 354 Fundus (uterus), 151, 152
visual pathways, 325, 326, 330 First arch syndrome, 215 Fungiform papillae, 213
visual reflexes, 326–329 First jejunal artery, 129 Fusion fascia, 97
Flaccid paralysis, 260, 261, 269,
F 272–274, 303 G
Flaccid weakness, 257, 271, 273
Face Gait abnormalities
Flagella
embryology, 214 ataxia, 268, 315
Kartagener syndrome, 18, 48
prechordal plate, 8, 9 lumbar plexus injuries, 198–199
microtubules, 15, 18
facial paralysis, 289, 299 tabes dorsalis, 274
spermatozoa, 159
corticobulbar fibers, 288 Galea aponeurotica, 217, 247
Flexor digitorum profundus, 190
oral cavity histology, 112 Gallbladder, 104–105
Flexor digitorum superficialis, 190
salivary glands, 120–121 embryology, 101, 102
Flexor pollicis longus, 190
Facial colliculus, 279 histology, 125
Flexor withdrawal reflex, 260
Facial nerves (CN VII) peritoneal membranes, 100
Flocculonodular lobe, 309, 310, 312
brain stem, 275–277, 279, 287 Gametogenesis, 4, 5
vestibular system, 294
corticobulbar fibers, 288, 289 Gamma motoneurons, 254–256, 271
Fluid balance by kidneys, 140
embryology, 211 lesions, 260–261
functions, 281 Foliate papillae, 213 muscle tone and reflex activity, 254–255,
Follicular development, 166,
lesions, 281, 289, 291, 299, 304, 305 259
nuclei, 283, 285 167–168 reflexes, 258–260
tongue innervation, 213 progesterone preventing, 169 g aminobutyric acid (GABA),
Falciform ligament, 101, 103 “Foot drop,” 198, 199 317–319
Foramen cecum, 212, 213
Fallopian tubes. See Oviducts Gap junctions, 16–17
Falx cerebri, 217, 247 Foramen magnum, 216, 217 ovarian follicles, 167
Foramen ovale
dural venous sinuses, 218–219 Gastric glands, 110, 113
atrial septation, 54, 56–58
Falx inguinalis, 88, 89, 91 Gastric pits, 110, 113
fetal circulation, 54–56
Fasciculus cuneatus, 263–265, 269 Gastroduodenal artery, 127, 128
Foramen primum, 57
Fasciculus gracilis, 263–265, 269, 271 Gastroepiploic artery, 128
Foramen secundum, 57
Fastigial nucleus, 312, 314 Gastrointestinal system
Forearm
Fat soluble vitamins in liver, 125 embryology
arterial supply, 187–190
Feet, 198, 199, 201, 205 foregut rotation, 95, 96
collateral circulation, 189, 190
Female pelvic anatomy, 151, 155 midgut rotation, 99
deep tendon reflex, 258
Female pseudointersexuality, 147 organ development, 95–97, 101–102
innervation, 181
Femoral arteries, 200, 201 peritoneum, 98–99
sensory, 182, 183
Femoral hernias, 94, 201 primitive gut tube, 94, 95
Forebrain, 227
Femoral nerves glands
Foregut, 94, 95
femoral triangle, 201 liver, 122–125
celiac artery, 126
injuries, 198 pancreas, exocrine, 121–122
lumbosacral plexus, 195, 196 derivatives, 95 salivary, 120–121
duodenum boundary, 107
Femoral sheath, 89, 201 histology, 108–109
Femoral triangle, 201 respiratory system origins, 36–38 regional differences, 110–111
rotation, 95–97
Femurs immune functions, 110
splenic vein, 131, 132
avascular necrosis of head, 202 bile transport of IgA, 12
374
INDEX
gut associated lymphatic tissue, 109, Grasp reflex, 352 histology, 73–74
110, 116, 118 Gray rami, 32, 233 middle mediastinum, 69
ileum, 116 Great cardiac vein, 77, 78 murmurs, 74–76
Langerhans cells, 112 Greater tubercle (radiology), 192 auscultation, 74, 75
Peyer’s patches, 110, 116, 118 Greater vestibular glands, 153 Heart failure cells, 53
innervation, 109–110 Gubernaculum, 91, 92 Helicobacter pylori infection, 114
intra vs. retroperitoneal organs, 99 Guillain Barre syndrome, 241 Hematopoiesis, 9, 12
mucous production Gut associated lymphatic tissue (GALT), Hemianopia, 331
Brunner glands, 110, 116 109, 110, 116, 118 Hemiballismus, 322, 323, 338
goblet cells, 115–117, 119 Peyer’s patches, 110, 116, 118 Hemidesmosomes, 16, 17
stomach, 111, 113 Gut tube. See Primitive gut tube Hemorrhoids, 108
peritoneal cavity, 99 Gyri of cerebral cortex, 343–344 rectal anastomoses, 132, 133
peritoneum, 98 Hepatic arteries, 100, 101, 104, 123, 127
Gastroschisis, 103 H liver blood flow value, 122
Gastrosplenic ligament, 95, 97, 101, 102 Habenular nuclei, 341 Hepatic ducts, 105
Gastrulation, 10 Hair cells Hepatic flexure (radiology), 173
Gaze dysfunction auditory system, 291, 292 Hepatic lobules, 123, 124
cerebellar lesions, 315 endolymph, 290 Hepatic portal system, 131–133
conjugate gaze, 296–300 vestibular system, 293 Hepatic portal vein
Genes determining sex, 3 Hand epiploic foramen, 100
Genitalia arterial supply, 187–190 fetal circulation, 55
embryology, 3, 4, 91, 136, 147 collateral circulation, 189, 190 hepatic portal system, 131–133
extraperitoneal connective tissue, 89 innervation, 181 liver blood flow, 122, 123
mesonephric tubules, 134, 136 sensory, 182, 183 liver central hilus, 104
female pelvis, 151, 152, 155 radiology, 193 peritoneal cavity, 101
male pelvis, 150, 153, 154 “Hand of benediction,” 185, 187 radiology, 174–175
urogenital triangle, 152–153, 155 Haploid cells in meiosis, 4, 5, 158 Hepatocytes, 122–123
Gerstmann syndrome, 353, 354, 360 Haustra, 118 zones, 124
Gestational trophoblastic disease, 9 Head Hepatoduodenal ligament, 100,
Glaucoma, 326 arterial supply, 209 103, 104
Glenoid fossa (radiology), 192 congenital abnormalities, 214, 215 Hepatogastric ligament, 100, 103
Glial cells, 239–240 embryology, 210–215 Hepatopancreatic ampulla of Vater, 105,
Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), 239 See also Cranium 107, 122, 125
Globose nucleus, 312, 314 Hearing. See Auditory system Hernias
Globus pallidus, 317–319, 321 Hearing loss bladder or rectum into vagina, 152
Glomeruli auditory tests, 293 diaphragmatic, 80
blood circulation, 140 conductive, 291, 292 pulmonary hypoplasia and, 38
embryology, 134 lesions causing, 292 esophageal hiatal hernia, 80
kidney anatomy, 139, 140 sensorineural, 291, 292 femoral, 94
renal corpuscle, 141, 142–144, 146 Heart inguinal, 92–93
Glossopharyngeal nerves (CN IX) anatomy, 70 sliding hiatal hernia, 106
brain stem, 275–277, 279 arterial supply, 76–77 Herniated disk, 24, 25
dorsal motor nucleus, 283 blood flow, 72–73 Herpes virus, 239
embryology, 211 blood flow, fetal, 54–56 Hesselbach’s triangle, 92, 93
functions, 281 Hilar lymph nodes, 44
borders, 69–71
lesions, 281, 303 Hillock of axon, 238
chambers, 72–73
nuclei, 283 Hilum, hepatic, 104, 123
innervation, 79
tongue innervation, 213 Hindbrain, 227
surface projections, 71, 75
“Glove and stocking” weakness, 227, 239 Hindgut
surfaces, 70
Goblet cells colon boundary, 107
venous drainage, 77–78
brush cells, 48 derivatives, 95
auscultation, 74, 75
large intestine, 116, 119 inferior mesenteric artery, 129
conduction system, 78–79
respiratory system, 48 inferior mesenteric vein, 131, 132
intercalated discs, 74
small intestine, 115–117 primitive gut tube, 94, 95
Purkinje fibers, 74, 78, 79
Golgi cells, 311–313 rectum, 107
septomarginal trabecula, 73, 79
Golgi tendon organs (GTOs), 259 septation, 96
embryology
Gonadal arteries, 126, 130 urorectal septum, 135–136
atrial septation, 56–59
Gout and colchicine, 15 Hip joints, 202
fetal circulation, 54–56
Graafian follicles, 166, 168 avascular necrosis of head of
heart tube, 53
Granule cells (cerebellum), 311–313 femur, 202
heart tube derivatives, 54, 72
circuitry, 311–314 dislocation and sciatic nerve
heart tube septation, 56–63
Granulosa cells, 166–168 injury, 199
truncus arteriosus septation, 60–63
lutein cells, 168–169 innervation, 195–197
ventricular septation, 59
37
ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Hippocampus radiology, 192 mammary glands, 172
lesions, 360 surgical neck fracture, 186, 187, 192 microglia link with CNS, 240
anterograde amnesia, 364 Huntington disease, 322, 323 Implantation of zygote, 7, 8
Kluver Bucy syndrome, 364 Hyaline cartilage rings of trachea, 47 ectopic pregnancy, 8, 170
limbic hippocampal formation, 361, 363 Hyaline membrane disease, 39 hCG levels, 9
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Negri bodies, 237 Hydatidiform mole, 11 Impotence, 338, 341
Papez circuit, 362–364 hCG levels, 9, 11 Incisive foramen, 214
thiamine deficiency, 336 Hydrocele, 92, 148 Incus, 290, 291
Hirschsprung disease, 103, 109, 231 Hydrocephalus, 228, 248 embryology, 211
Histology Parinaud syndrome, 306, 308 Indifferent gonads, 3, 4, 6
Physiology MedicalGenetics
definition, 13 Hyperacusis, 291 Indirect inguinal hernias, 92, 93
epithelia, 13–14 Hyperplasia of the prostate, 150 Infants
cell adhesion molecules, 15 Hypertrophic pyloric stenosis, 102 passive immunity, 116, 172
cell surface specializations, 16–18 Hypoblast, 8–10 premature
cytoskeletal elements, 14–15 Hypogastrium, 86 lung development, 37
Pathology gastrointestinal system, B 1 eh 0 a 8 v – i 1 o 0 r 9 alScience/SocialSciences hindgut referred pain, 95 patent ductus arteriosus, 60
esophagus, 110–112 Hypoglossal nerves (CN XII) respiratory distress syndrome, 39
gallbladder, 125 brain stem, 275–277, 279 respiratory distress syndrome, 39, 52
large intestine, 118–119 corticobulbar fibers, 288 tracheoesophageal fistula, 37
liver, 122–125 embryology, 211 Inferior cerebellar peduncle lesions, 303
Microbiologyoral cavity, 112 functions, 281 Inferior colliculi, 276–278
pancreas, exocrine, 121–122 lesions, 281, 302, 303 auditory system, 292
regional differences, 110–111 nuclei, 284 midbrain, 287
salivary glands, 120–121 tongue innervation, 213 Inferior epigastric vessels, 89, 91
small intestine, 114–118 Hypospadias, 148 Inferior gluteal nerves, 197
stomach, 110–114 Hypothalamus injuries, 198
heart, 73–74 anatomy, 276 lumbosacral plexus, 195, 196
nervous system cerebral hemispheres, 344 Inferior mesenteric artery, 126, 129, 130
nuclei, 337–341 Inferior mesenteric vein, 131, 132
axons, 241–242
descending fibers, 277–280, 282 Inferior olivary nuclei, 279
neurons, 235–239
Nissl substance, 235–237 lesions, 303–305 Inferior pancreaticoduodenal arteries, 128,
midbrain, 287 129
Schwann cells, 241, 242
pons, 284 Inferior phrenic arteries, 126
reproductive systems
ovaries, 167–170 endocrine functions, 339–341 Inferior sagittal sinus, 217, 219, 247
lesions, 338–341 Inferior vena cava, 130–132
penis, 154
testes and accessory glands, 156–165 brain stem lesions, 282 radiology, 174–177
uterus, 170, 171 limbic system, 361, 364 Infraspinatus muscles, 191
radiology, 365 Infundibulum, 73, 165, 168, 169
vagina, 171
respiratory system Hypotonia, 315 Inguinal canal, 90
boundaries, 91
alveoli, 50–53
I deep inguinal ring, 89, 90
bronchi, 46, 49
female contents, 90
bronchioles, 46, 49–50 Ileal diverticulum, 103
inguinal triangle, 92, 93
overview, 45–46 Ileocolic artery, 128, 129
male contents, 90–91
trachea, 46–49 Ileum, 107
superficial inguinal ring, 87, 89, 90
tissue types, 13 embryology, 98
Inguinal hernias, 92–94
urinary system, 139–146 histology, 110, 111, 114–118
Inguinal ligament, 86–88, 91
HIV 1 virus, 240 ileal diverticulum, 103
femoral triangle, 201
Holoprosencephaly, 228 immune activity, 116, 118
inguinal vs. femoral hernias, 94
Homeostasis radiology, 173
Insufficiency of heart valves, 74, 75
hypothalamus, 337–341 Iliac crest and lumbar puncture, 29
Insulin and corticosteroids, 52
kidneys, 140 Iliacus muscle, 137
Integrins, 15
Hook of Hamate, 193 Iliofemoral ligament, 202
Intercalated discs, 74
Horner syndrome, 31, 232, 269, 274, 282, Ilioinguinal nerve, 90
Intercalated ducts
304, 305 Imaging. See Radiology
pancreas, exocrine, 122
pupillary abnormalities, 329 Immune system
salivary glands, 120
thoracic outlet syndrome, 207 gastrointestinal system, 110
Intercostal spaces, 38
Horseshoe kidney, 137 bile transport of IgA, 125
Interlaminar spaces, 22
Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) gut associated lymphatic tissue, 109,
ligamenta flava, 27, 29
levels and pregnancy, 9, 11 110, 116, 118
lumbar puncture, 27, 29
placenta, 169 ileum, 116, 118
Intermediate filaments, 15, 17
Humerus Langerhans cells, 112
Intermediate mesoderm, 3, 10
head dislocation, 186, 187, 191 Peyer’s patches, 110, 116, 118
Intermediate zone of spinal cord, 252, 25
mid shaft fracture, 185, 187, 192 infant passive immunity, 116, 172
376
INDEX
Internal abdominal oblique muscle, 88, Jugular foramen, 216 Larynx, 46
89, 91 jugular vein, 218 embryology, 211
Internal arcuate fibers, 280 sigmoid sinuses, 219, 247 Lateral cervical cysts, 212
Internal capsule syndrome, 217 Lateral epicondyle, 192
arterial supply, 357 Juxtaglomerular complex, 146 Lateral geniculate body, 332, 355, 356
basal ganglia, 318, 320, 321 Lateral horn gray matter, 28, 30, 32, 269
corticospinal tract, 257 K Lateral lemniscus
Internal carotid arteries Kartagener syndrome, 18, 48 auditory system, 291, 292
cavernous sinuses, 219, 220 pons, 284
ovum transport and, 170
thrombosis, 220 Lateral ligament of ankle, 205
Kayser Fleischer ring, 322, 323
cerebral cortex, 346–348 Lateral medullary syndrome, 303
K (Kulchitsky) cells, 48
radiology, 349 Lateral menisci, 203, 204
bronchial metastatic tumors, 49
visual field defects, 332 Lateral mesoderm, 10
Keratins as intermediate filaments, 15, 17
Internal iliac arteries, 126 Lateral plantar nerves, 199
Kidneys
Lateral pontine syndrome, 304–305
Internal jugular veins, 66
anatomy, 137, 139, 140
dural venous sinus drainage, 218, Lateral sulcus, 344, 351
blood circulation, 140
Lateral thoracic artery, 35
219, 247
congenital abnormalities, 136–137
Left anterior descending (LAD) artery, 76,
lymphatic drainage, 43, 45, 65, 67
renal agenesis, 38, 136
77, 79
Internal mammary artery, 35
embryology, 134–135
Left colic artery, 129, 130
Internal pudendal artery, 152
dorsal embryonic mesentery, 97
Left common iliac artery (radiology), 177
Internal spermatic fascia, 89, 91
endocrine functions, 139, 145, 146 Left gastric artery, 126–128
Internal thoracic artery, 35
histology, 139–146 Left gastric vein, 132
Internal urethral sphincter, 138
homeostasis by, 140 Left gastroepiploic artery, 128
Internal vertebral venous plexus, 26, 27
radiology, 175–176 Left renal vein compression, 130
Internuclear ophthalmoplegia, 282
renal calculi, 137 Left to right shunts
Interposed nucleus, 312, 314
ureters, 176, 177 atrial septal defects, 58, 63
Interventricular arteries, 76, 77
Kinesin, 15 as noncyanotic, 58, 59, 63
Interventricular septum, 59
fast anterograde transport, 238 patent ductus arteriosus, 60, 63, 68
Intervertebral disks, 22–24
Klumpke’s paralysis, 184 pulmonary hypertension, 59
Intervertebral foramina, 22–24, 26
Kluver Bucy syndrome, 360, 364 ventricular septal defects, 59, 63
Intestinal arteries, 128, 129
Knee joints, 203–205 Lens of eye, 326
Intracerebral hemorrhage, 350
deep tendon reflex, 258–259 accommodation convergence reaction,
radiology, 365
injuries 327, 328
Intrafusal muscle fibers, 256, 258
anterior cruciate ligament, 205 Leukodystrophies, 240–241
gamma motoneurons, 254–256
drawer signs, 204 Levator ani muscle, 149
reflexes, 258–260 medial meniscus, 204, 205 Lewy bodies, 237
Intraocular pressure, 326
tibial collateral ligament, 203, 205 Parkinson disease, 322
Intraperitoneal organs
radiology, 206 Leydig cells
duodenum, 106
Korsakoff syndrome, 336, 339, 364 testis interstitial tissues, 157, 160, 161
pancreas tail, 105
Kulchitsky (K) cells, 48 testosterone secretion, 3, 160
retroperitoneal organs versus, 99
bronchial metastatic tumors, 49 Ligamenta flava, 27, 29
visceral peritoneum, 98, 99 Kupffer cells, 122 Ligamentum arteriosum
Intrinsic factor, 113 coarctation of the aorta, 68
Inverse muscle stretch reflex, 259 L fetal circulation, 55, 56
Iris, 326, 328 patent ductus arteriosus, 60
Ischial spine, 88 Labia majora embryology, 147 heart anatomy, 66, 70
Ischioanal fossa, 152 Labia minora, 155 Ligamentum capitis femorum, 202
Ischiocavernosus muscle, 153 embryology, 147 Ligamentum teres of liver, 55, 56, 104
ejaculation, 164 Lactation, 172 Ligamentum venosum, 55, 56
Lacunar ligament, 87
Ischiofemoral ligament, 202 Light reflex, 277
Ischiopubic ramus, 155 Laminae of vertebrae, 23 Limbic system
Lamina propria of GI mucosa, 109, 110
Islets of Langerhans, 121, 122 anatomy, 361, 363
duodenum, 116
Isthmus of uterus, 165, 169 functions, 361, 363
esophagus, 112
Ito cells, 125 olfactory system, 361–363
gut associated lymphatic tissue,
Papez circuit, 362, 363
J 109, 118 Limbs. See Lower limbs; Upper limbs
small intestine, 115
Linea alba, 85
Jaundice, obstructive, 105
Langerhans cells, 112
Linea semilunaris, 85
Jejunum, 107
Language
Line of Gennari, 346, 355
digestion, 116
aphasias, 347, 352–354, 360
Lingual gyrus
embryology, 98
dominant hemisphere and, 346
lesions, 333
histology, 110, 111, 114–118
Large intestine, 118–119
Meyer’s loop, 331, 332
radiology, 173, 176
Laryngotracheal diverticulum, 36
radiology, 365
37
ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Lingula of left lung, 43 bladder, 138 Medial lemniscus, 263–265, 271
Lithiasis, biliary, 125 breast, 36 brain stem, 277–279, 282
Liver, 103–104 cancer metastasis internal arcuate fibers, 280
embryology, 97, 101 breast, 36 medulla, 282
ventral embryonic mesentery, 95, 97, internal vertebral venous plexus, 27 pons, 284
Pharmacology Biochemistry
101 lung, 44 lesions, 282, 302–305
hepatocytes, 122–123 penis and scrotum, 91 midbrain, 287
zones, 124 testes, 91 Medial ligament of ankle, 205
histology, 122–125 drainage, 43–45 Medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF)
lobules, 123, 124 duodenum, 116 anatomy, 278, 279, 282
Physiology MedicalGenetics
peritoneal membranes, 100 ileum, 116 horizontal conjugate gaze, 296, 297
radiology, 174–175 lungs, 44–45 lesions, 282, 297, 298, 300
vitamin storage, 125 pectinate line, 108 midbrain, 287
Locus caeruleus, 308 testes, 91 pons, 284
Long thoracic nerve, 35, 182 thoracic duct, 43–45 vestibular fibers, 293, 294
Pathologylesions, 186–187 BehavioralScience/SocialSciences posterior mediastinum, 65 Medial medullary syndrome, 302–303
Loop of Henle, 141, 145 superior mediastinum, 67 Medial menisci, 203, 204
Lower limbs Medial midbrain syndrome, 306–307
ankle joints, 205 M Medial plantar nerves, 199
arterial supply, 200–201 Medial pontine syndrome, 304, 305
Macrophages, alveolar, 51, 53
Microbioloegmybryology, 210 Medial umbilical ligaments, 55, 56
Macula (eye), 326
feet, 198, 199, 201, 205 Median nerves
collateral circulation, 332, 350,
femoral triangle, 201 brachial plexus, 179–181
355, 359
hip joints, 202 carpal tunnel, 183, 190
hemianopia with macular sparing,
innervation syndrome, 183, 190, 193
331, 355
injuries and gait, 198–199 lesions, 185–187
lesions, 333
lumbosacral plexus, 195–197 radiology, 192, 193
Macula (vestibular system), 293
segmental, 197 sensory, 182, 183
Macula adherens, 16
sensory, 199 Median sacral artery, 126
Major duodenal papilla, 105, 107
knee joints, 203–205 Median umbilical ligament, 136
Male pelvic anatomy, 150, 153, 154
radiology, 206 Mediastinal surface of lung, 42
Male pseudointersexuality, 147
Lumbar arteries, 126 Mediastinum, 63–69
Malignancies. See Cancers
Lumbar plexus, 251, 253 Malleus, 290, 291 adult thoracic cavity, 38
ilioinguinal nerve, 90 embryology, 211 anterior, 64
parietal peritoneum, 98 Mammary glands, 172 inferior, 63
Lumbar puncture, 27, 29 See also Breasts mediastinal parietal pleura, 40
Lumbar splanchnic nerves, 138 Mammillary bodies, 338, 341 middle, 66, 68–69 (See also Heart)
ejaculation, 164 pneumothorax, 40
anatomy, 276, 339, 344
Lumbar vertebrae, 22 lesions, 339 posterior, 64–65
iliac crest and lumbar puncture, 29 sternal angle, 63, 64, 66
Papez circuit, 362, 363–364
Lumbosacral plexus, 195–196 superior, 63, 65–67
radiology, 365
collateral nerves, 197 Medulla, 282–283
Mandible embryology, 210, 211
injuries, 198–199 anatomy, 276, 277, 279, 280
Mandibular nerves
Lunate, 193 cerebral hemispheres, 344
embryology, 211
Lungs cranial nerves, 275, 277, 279, 280
functions, 280
anatomy, 42–43 embryology, 227
lesions, 280
aspiration of foreign body, 43 medial medullary syndrome, 302–303
nuclei, 286
auscultation, 43 radiology, 365
tongue, 213
cancer, 45 Meiosis, 4, 5
Marcus Gunn pupil, 329
apex of lung, 42 microfilaments in cytokinesis, 15
Marginal artery, 129, 130
metastasis, 44 microtubules of mitotic spindle, 15
Mastectomy nerve lesion, 35, 186–187
capillary diseases, 45 Maxilla embryology, 210, 211 ovarian follicle, 167, 168
embryology, 36–38 seminiferous tubule, 158
Maxillary nerves
primitive gut tube, 95, 96 cavernous sinus, 219, 220 Meissner’s plexus, 109, 110
pulmonary hypoplasia, 38 thrombosis, 220 Membranous ventricular septal defect, 59
histology, 45–53 functions, 280 Memory
lymphatic drainage, 43–45 lesions, 280 amnesias, 364
pleura, 39–41 nuclei, 286 limbic system, 361
tracheoesophageal fistula, 37, 38 thalamus, 336
Meckel diverticulum, 103
See also Surfactant Meconium and Hirschsprung See also Alzheimer disease
Luteinizing hormone, 168 Meniere disease, 295
disease, 231
Lymphatic system Medial collateral ligaments, 203 Meningeal dural layer, 217
abdominal wall, 90 Medial geniculate body, 292 dural venous sinuses, 218–21
378
INDEX
Meninges Microvilli, 17, 18 cerebral cortex
cranial, 217–218 Micturition, 138 motor neurons, 255, 256, 271
spaces of, 218, 247 autonomic nervous system, 138 corticospinal tracts
spinal, 25–27, 217 hyperplasia of the prostate, 150 anatomy, 256, 257, 269, 271
epidural anesthesia, 27, 29 urethral sphincters, 138, 149, 150 brain stem, 277–279, 282, 284
lumbar puncture, 27, 29 Midaxillary line, 41 lesions, 257, 260, 261, 282, 302, 304,
Meniscus of knees, 203 Midbrain 305, 307
Menstrual cycle anatomy, 276–278, 287–289 neocortex, 346
amenorrhea, 338, 339, 341 cranial nerves, 275, 277, 287–289 embryology, 225, 226
first missed in pregnancy, 10 embryology, 227 gamma motoneurons, 254–256, 271
progestational phase, 8 medial midbrain syndrome, lesions, 260–261
Mesangial cells, 145, 146 306–307 muscle tone and reflex activity,
Mesencephalic nuclei, 286, 287 radiology, 365
254–255, 259
Mesencephalon, 227 substantia nigra, 278, 287 reflexes, 258–260
Mesenteries Midclavicular lines, 86
motor homunculus, 345, 351 (See also
colon, 107 pleural reflections, 41
Motor cortex)
embryonic, 95, 97, 98, 101 Middle cardiac vein, 77, 78
reflexes, 258–260
histology, 108 Middle cerebral arteries, 347–349
thalamus, 335, 336
intra vs. retroperitoneal organs, 99 occlusion, 332, 347, 353, 359
upper and lower, 255–257
mesoappendix, 107 radiology, 349
corticobulbar fibers, 288–289
peritoneum, 98–100 Middle colic artery, 128, 129
lesions, 259–261, 271
Mesocolon, 98
Middle meningeal arteries, 209
ventral horn, 252–255
Mesoderm epidural hematoma, 350
ventral root, 28, 252, 254, 255
derivatives, 10, 12, 229
Middle scalene muscles, 208
Mucociliary escalator system, 48
pharyngeal arch derivatives, 211 Middle suprarenal arteries, 126, 130
Mucosa of GI tract, 108–111
extraembryonic, 9
Midgut, 94, 95
gastric and H. pylori infection, 114
face, 214
colon boundary, 107
gastrulation, 10 large intestine, 119
derivatives, 95
heart, 53 Mucous secreting cells of stomach, 111,
duodenum, 107
endocardial cushions, 57 113
malrotation, 103
hematopoiesis, 9 Mullerian ducts, 3, 4
rotation, 96, 98
kidneys, 134 Mullerian inhibiting factor (MIF), 3,
superior mesenteric artery, 128
nervous system, 12 4, 160
superior mesenteric vein, 131, 132
pharyngeal arches, 210 Multiple sclerosis (MS), 241
Miosis, 327, 328
pleura, 39 relative afferent pupil, 329
Mitochondria in spermatozoa, 159
primitive gut tube, 94, 96 unilateral optic nerve lesions, 332
Mitosis
respiratory system, 36 Mumps and parotid salivary glands, 121
microfilaments in cytokinesis, 15
spleen, 102 Murmurs of heart, 74–76
microtubules of mitotic spindle, 15
vertebral column, 21, 210 none in syncytiotrophoblast, 9 auscultation, 74, 75
Mesometrium, 152 zygotes, 7, 8 Muscle stretch reflex, 258–259
Mesonephric ducts (Wolffian), 3, 4, 136 Mitotic spindle microtubules, 15 Muscularis externa, 108–110, 112
embryology, 134–136 Muscularis mucosa, 109, 110, 115
Mitral valve
duct of Gartner, 147 auscultation, 74, 75 Musculocutaneous nerves
Mesonephros, 134–136
blood flow, 72, 73 brachial plexus, 179–181
Mesosalpinx, 152 murmurs, 74–76 injury, 183, 184
Mesothelioma, 45
Moderator band, 73, 79 lesions, 186, 187
Mesothelium of GI serosa, 109
Molar pregnancies, 11 sensory, 183
gallbladder covered by, 125
hCG levels, 9, 11 Mydriasis, 328
Mesovarium, 152
Morula, 7, 8 Myelencephalon, 227
Metanephric mass, 134, 135
Mossy fibers, 310, 312–313 Myelin sheath
Metanephros, 134
Motor cortex axon initial segment, 238
Metencephalon, 309
basal ganglia pathways, 317–319, 324 disorders of myelination, 240–241
Meyer’s loop, 331, 332
cerebral cortex subacute combined degeneration, 273,
lesions, 333, 347
frontal lobe, 351, 360 274
Microfilaments, 14–15, 237
functional areas, 351 neuron structure, 236, 238
Microglia, 240
motor homunculus, 345, 351 oligodendrocytes forming, 240
Microtubules, 15
precentral gyrus, 256, 257 optic nerves, 325
axonal transport, 237–239
radiology, 365 Schwann cells forming, 240
neuropathies and, 227, 239
Motor system vitamin B12 deficiency, 113
cilia, 15, 18
alpha motoneurons, 254–256, 271 Myocardial infarction, 76
colchicine and, 15
lesions, 260–261 Myocardium histology, 73–74
neuron cytoskeleton, 237
tau protein, 238 reflexes, 258–260 Myometrium, 165, 170, 171
spermatozoa, 159 autonomic nervous system, 30, 230 Myotatic reflex, 258–259
37
ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
N regeneration of, 243, 244 Olfactory tract (CN I)
structure of, 236, 238 anatomy, 276, 277
Narrow angle glaucoma, 326
cytoskeleton, 236, 237 functions, 280
NAVEL contents of femoral canal, 201
tau protein, 238 lesions, 280, 360, 362
Neck
Neuropathies, 227, 239 Oligodendrocytes, 240
Pharmacoloagrtyerial supply, 209 Biochemistry
Neurosyphilis and Argyll Robertson Oligohydramnios and renal agenesis, 38,
cervical parietal pleura, 40
pupils, 274, 327, 329 136
embryology, 210–215
Neurulation, 225–226 Olive, 276
congenital abnormalities, 215
Night blindness, 325 Omental bursa, 99, 101
scalene triangle, 207, 208
Nissl substance, 235–237 Omentum, 98
Physiologthyoracic outlet, 38, 207 MedicalGenetics
axon hillock, 238 greater, 100
syndrome, 207
chromatolysis, 243 dorsal embryonic mesentery, 95
Negri bodies, 237
Nitric oxide for erection, 164 lesser, 100, 101
Neocortex, 344–346
Nodes of Ranvier, 236, 240 hepatoduodenal ligament, 100, 103
Nephrons
Noncyanotic conditions hepatogastric ligament, 100, 103
Pathologeymbryology, 135 BehavioralScience/SocialSciences atrial septic defects, 58, 63 ventral embryonic mesentery, 95, 97,
histology, 141–146
left to right shunts, 58, 59, 63 101
Nerve blocks
patent ductus arteriosus, 60, 63, 68 Omphalocele, 103
epidural, 27, 29
pulmonary hypertension, 59 Omphalomesenteric veins, 54
intercostal, 38
ventricular septal defects, 59, 63 Oocytes
pudendal, 152
Microbiology Notochord fertilization, 7
Nervous system. See Central nervous
follicular development, 166, 168
chordoma, 11
system; Peripheral nervous system
germ layer derivatives, 12 meiosis, 5, 168
Neural crest cells oogenesis, 6
nervous system embryology, 10,
colonic aganglionosis, 103, 109
225–226 ovulation, 166–168
derivatives, 12, 229 Oogenesis, 4, 6
neural plate, 225, 226
endocardial cushion development, 57,
meiosis, 4, 5
nucleus pulposus, 12, 23
59 Oogonia
vertebral column embryology, 21
face, 214 follicular development, 166, 167
Nuclear envelope, 15
gastrulation, 10, 12 meiosis, 5, 167
Nucleus ambiguus, 279, 283
heart tube formation, 53 oogenesis, 6
lesions, 303
nervous system, 225–226 Open angle glaucoma, 326
Nucleus cuneatus, 263, 280, 282
postganglionic neurons, 30, 225 Open pneumothorax, 40
Nucleus gracilis, 263, 271, 280, 282
Schwann cells, 240 Ophthalmic arteries, 347
Nucleus pulposus, 23, 24
pharyngeal arches, 210, 211 occlusion, 359
herniation, 24, 25
truncus arteriosus septation, 60, 61 Ophthalmic nerves
Nystagmus, 296
Neural fold, 225, 226 cavernous sinus, 219, 220
caloric test, 295, 296
Neural plate, 225, 226 thrombosis, 220
cerebellar lesions, 315
Neural tube, 225, 226, 229 functions, 280
vestibular, 294–296
Neuroectoderm, 10, 12, 225, 229 lesions, 280
Neuroendocrine cells nuclei, 286
O
gastrointestinal, 114 Ophthalmic veins, 218, 219
pulmonary, 48, 49 Obturator nerves, 195, 196 Optic chiasm
Neurofibrillary tangles, 238, 362 injuries, 198 anatomy, 276, 277, 321
Neurofibromatosis (type 2), 244 Occipital lobe, 355–356, 360 cerebral hemispheres, 344
Neurofilaments, 15, 237 anatomy, 344 hypothalamus, 339, 340
Neurohypophysis, 339 lesions, 356 lesions, 333
Neurons Occipital sinus, 219 visual field defects, 331–332
action potential, 238, 240 Oculomotor nerves (CN III) visual pathway, 330, 332
degenerative diseases brain stem, 275–278, 287 Optic disc, 325, 326
astroglial scars, 239 cavernous sinus, 219, 220, 247 Optic nerves (CN II)
inclusions seen in, 237 thrombosis, 220 brain anatomy, 276, 277
microglia cytokines, 240 embryology, 211 eye anatomy, 222
microglia free radical production, 240 functions, 280 functions, 280
neurofibrillary tangles, 238 horizontal conjugate gaze, 297, 298 lesions, 280, 332, 333
tau protein, 238 lesions, 280, 306, 307, 329 visual field defects, 331–332
histology, 235–239 nuclei, 287 pupillary light reflex, 326, 327
axons, 241–242 orbital muscles, 221, 297, 298, 326 visual pathway, 325, 326
Nissl substance, 235–237 pupillary light reflex, 326, 327 Optic neuritis, 332
inclusions, 237 vestibular fibers, 293, 294 Optic tract
myelination disorders, 240–241 Olfactory system, 361–363 lesions, 333
deficits, 280, 360, 362 visual field defects, 331–332
subacute combined degeneration, 273,
olfactory bulb, 276, 361–362 optic chiasm, 330
274
brain anatomy, 363 thalamus, 335, 33
neurofilaments, 15
380
INDEX
Oral cavity Paramesonephric ducts, 3, 4 Pelvis
embryology, 8, 9, 214 Parasternal lymph nodes, 36 female, 151–152, 155
histology, 112 Parasympathetic nervous system, 32–33, hip joint, 202
salivary glands, 120–121 231–232 innervation, 155
Orbital muscles, 221–222 autonomic nervous system, 30, 230, 231 lumbosacral plexus, 195–197
embryology, 211 bladder innervation, 138 male, 150, 153, 154
Orbit veins, 218, 219 craniosacral outflow, 32, 33, 231, 232 Pemphigus vulgaris, 16
Organ of Corti, 290, 291 eye innervation, 326, 328 Penis
Oval window, 290, 291 gastrointestinal system, 110 anatomy, 150, 154, 156
Ovaries peristalsis, 111, 116 cancer, 91
anatomy, 165 salivary glands, 120 ejaculation, 164
female anatomy, 151, 152 heart innervation, 79 embryology, 136, 147
embryology, 3, 4, 147 hypothalamus, 339 congenital abnormalities, 148
fertilization, 7 internal anal sphincter, 107 erection, 164
follicular development, 166, 167–168 micturition, 138 hypothalamic lesions, 338, 341
histology, 167–170 spastic bladder, 138 fluid accumulation, 165
oogenesis, 4, 6 penile erection, 164 histology, 154
meiosis, 4, 5 Parathyroid gland urine extravasation, 154, 165
Oviducts ectopic, 215 urogenital triangle, 152–154
ampulla, 7 embryology, 212 Peptic cells, 114
tubal ectopic pregnancy, 8 Paraventricular nuclei, 338–340 Periaqueductal gray, 308
anatomy, 165, 169 Paravertebral line, 41 Pericardium, 68–69
fertilization, 7, 8, 168–170 Paravertebral motor ganglia, 30 cardiac tamponade, 69
histology, 169–170 Paraxial mesoderm, 10 heart wall, 74
ovulation, 169 Parietal cells of stomach, 113, 114 mesodermal origins, 39
Ovulation, 166–169 Parietal layer, 39 Pericranium, 217
progesterone preventing, 169 pericardium, 68–69 Pericytes, 240, 242
Ovum peritoneum, 89, 98 Perilymph, 290, 291
fertilization, 7, 8, 170 embryology, 98 Perimetrium, 165
infundibulum, 169 female pelvis, 151 Perineal membrane, 153
ovulation, 166, 168 male pelvis, 150 Perineum, 152
Oxyntic cells, 113 peritonitis, 98 anal triangle, 152
Oxytocin, 338, 340 retroperitoneal organs, 98, 99 female, 155
secondary retroperitonealization, 97, pudendal innervation, 155
P 99 trauma to, 165
Pacemaker of heart. See Sinoatrial (SA) pleura, 39–40 Periosteal dural layer, 217
node pleural reflections, 41 dural venous sinuses, 218–219
Pain pleurisy, 40 Peripheral nervous system
anterolateral sensory system, 265 Parietal lobe, 353–355, 360 autonomic nervous system, 30
medial meniscus tear, 205 anatomy, 344 parasympathetic nervous system,
peritonitis, 98 corticospinal tract, 257 32–33
referred pain lesions, 353, 356 sympathetic nervous system, 30–32
diaphragmatic in shoulder, 80 postcentral gyrus, 262–264 axonal regeneration, 243, 244
primitive gut tube structures, 95 sensory homunculus, 345, 353 definition, 225
spinal lesion, 265, 266, 269 Parinaud syndrome, 306, 308, 341 embryology, 225–229
thalamic pain syndrome, 336 Parkinson disease, 322, 323 glial and supporting cells, 239–240
Palate embryology, 214 Parotid salivary glands, 120, 121 histology of neurons, 235–240
Pampiniform venous plexus, 91 Passive immunity of infants, 116, 172 postganglionic neurons, 30
Pancreas, 105–106 Patau syndrome holoprosencephaly, 228 spinal and cranial nerves as, 27
anastomoses, 105, 127, 129 Patella, 203 Peristalsis of GI tract
annular, 102 deep tendon reflex, 258–259 Hirschsprung disease, 103, 109
embryology, 97, 101, 102 radiology, 206 innervation, 109–110, 116
foregut, 95, 96 Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), 60, 63, 68 muscularis externa, 109
exocrine gland, 121–122 Pectinate line, 108 Peritoneal cavity, 99, 101
radiology, 175 Pectinate muscles, 72 embryology, 97, 98
Pancreatic duct of Wirsung, 105, 106, 122 Pectoral lymph node group, 36 Peritoneum, 89, 98
hepatopancreatic ampulla, 105, 107, 122, Pedicles of vertebrae, 23, 24 embryology
125 Pelvic brim, 149 descent of testes, 92
Paneth cells, 110, 111, 115, 117 Pelvic diaphragm, 149, 152 mesodermal origins, 39
Papez circuit, 362, 363–364 Pelvic kidney, 137 primitive gut tube, 97
anterior thalamic nuclei, 336 Pelvic splanchnic nerves, 32, 33 female pelvis, 151
Papillae of tongue, 213 bladder innervation, 138 intra vs. retroperitoneal organs, 99
Papillary muscles, 72, 73 penile erection, 164 male pelvis, 150
38
ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
membranes, 100 Plicae circulares, 115, 116 Preganglionic neurons, 30, 230, 231
peritonitis, 98 Pneumocytes, 51, 52 parasympathetic nervous system, 32, 33,
serosa of GI tract, 108 Pneumothorax, 40 230, 231
Peritonitis, 98 Podocytes, 142–144 sympathetic nervous system, 30, 31,
Pernicious anemia, 113 Polar body, 6, 168 230–232
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Persistent truncus arteriosus, 62, 63 Polio virus Pregnancy
Peyer’s patches, 110, 116, 118 poliomyelitis, 272, 273 alpha fetoprotein levels, 225
Pharyngeal apparatus, 210–212 retrograde axonal transport, 239 anencephaly, 226, 228
congenital abnormalities, 215 Polkissen cells, 145, 146 spina bifida, 226, 228
cleft lip, 214 Polyhydramnios corpus luteum and, 169
Physiology MedicalGenetics
cleft palate, 214 anencephaly, 226 ectopic, 8, 170
Pharyngeal arches, 210, 211 annular pancreas, 102 hCG levels, 9
face, 214 duodenal atresia, 103 human chorionic gonadotropin levels,
first arch syndrome, 215 hypertrophic pyloric stenosis, 102 9, 11
tongue, 213 tracheoesophageal fistula and, 37 menstrual cycle first missed, 10
PathoPlohgayryngeal cyst, 215 BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Pons molar, 11
Pharyngeal fistula, 215 anatomy, 276–279, 284–287 myometrium growth, 170
Pharyngeal grooves, 210 cerebral hemispheres, 344 Premature infants
pharyngeal cyst, 215 cranial nerves, 275, 277, 285–287 lung development, 37
pharyngeal fistula, 215 embryology, 227 patent ductus arteriosus, 60
MicrobPiohlaorgyyngeal pouches, 210, 212 lateral pontine syndrome, 304–305 respiratory distress syndrome, 39
DiGeorge sequence, 212, 215 medial pontine syndrome, 304, 305 Presbycusis, 291
pharyngeal fistula, 215 radiology, 365 Pretectal nuclei, 277
Pharynx embryology, 210–211 Pontocerebellar angle syndrome, 306 Prevertebral motor ganglia, 30, 31
congenital abnormalities, 214, 215 Popliteal arteries, 200, 201 Primary palate, 214
thyroid diverticulum, 213 Pores of Kohn, 52 Primary sex cords, 3
Philtrum, 214 Portacaval anastomoses, 132, 133 Primitive gut tube, 94, 96
Phrenic nerves Portal hypertension, 132 congenital abnormalities, 102–103
diaphragm, 79 Portal lobules, 123, 124 derivatives, 95
scalene triangle and, 207, 208 Portal triad, 104, 123 foregut rotation, 95, 96
superior mediastinum, 66, 67 Portal vein. See Hepatic portal vein hindgut, 94, 95
Pia mater Postcentral gyrus derivatives, 95
cranial, 217, 247 anterolateral system, 262, 265, 266 septation, 96
spinal, 26–27, 252 dorsal column–medial lemniscal system, midgut, 94, 95
PICA (posterior inferior cerebellar artery) 262–264 derivatives, 95
occlusion, 303 Posterior cerebral arteries, 347–350 malrotation, 103
Pineal body, 338, 341 occlusion, 332, 350, 355, 356, rotation, 96, 98
anatomy, 276, 277, 344 358, 359 organ development, 95, 97
circadian rhythms, 338, 340, 341 Posterior chamber (eye), 326 secondary retroperitonealization, 97, 99
lesions, 341 Posterior communicating arteries Primitive node, 10
radiology, 365 aneurysm, 221, 359 Primitive pit, 10
tumors, 306, 308, 341 circle of Willis, 301, 346, 348, 350 Primitive streak, 10
Piriformis syndrome, 198 occlusion, 359 Primordial germ cells, 3
Pisiform, 193 Posterior cruciate ligaments, 203, 204 Primum atrial septal defect, 58, 59
Pitch of sound and hearing, 290, 291 posterior drawer sign, 204 Process vaginalis, 92, 148
Pituitary Posterior tibial arteries and fractures, 201 Progestational phase of menstrual cycle, 8
anatomy, 276, 344 Postganglionic neurons, 30, 225, 230, 231 Progesterone, 169
cavernous sinuses, 220 parasympathetic nervous system, 32, 33, Prolactin and arcuate nuclei, 339
hypothalamus, 339, 340 231, 232 Prolapse of the uterus, 152
ovulation, 168 sympathetic nervous system, 30, 31, 225, Pronephros, 134
radiology, 365 231, 232 Proper hepatic artery, 100, 101, 104, 127, 128
visual field defects, 332 Potter sequence, 38, 136 Proprioception
Placenta Pouch of Douglas, 8, 151 Clarke nucleus, 255
embryology, 7, 8 PPRF (paramedian pontine reticular dorsal column–medial lemniscal system,
human chorionic gonadotropin, 169 formation), 296–299 263, 264
Pleura, 39–40 Precentral gyrus spinocerebellar tracts, 267–268
mesothelioma, 45 cerebellum, 314 Prosopagnosia, 356
pleural recesses, 41 cerebral cortex, 344 Prostaglandins, 139
pleural reflections, 41 primary motor cortex, 256, 257 Prostate gland
Pleural cavity, 39, 40 upper motor neurons, 261, 288, 314 ejaculation, 164
pleural reflections, 41 Prechordal plate, 8–10 embryology, 136
pneumothorax, 40 Prefrontal cortex, 352, 360 histology, 164
Pleurisy, 40 limbic system, 363 hyperplasia, 15
382
INDEX
male anatomy, 150, 154, 156 Q Renal agenesis, 136
perineal pouches, 153 pulmonary hypoplasia and, 38
Quadrantanopia, 331, 360
Proximal convoluted tubule, 141, 145 Renal arteries, 126, 130, 140
Quadratus lumborum muscle, 137
renal corpuscle, 142, 143 Renal corpuscle, 141, 142–144, 146
Pseudointersexuality, 147 Renal pelvis (radiology), 176
R
Psoas major muscle (radiology), 176, Renal system. See Kidneys; Urinary
Rabies virus
177 system
parotid salivary glands, 121
ureters on anterior surface, 137 Renin, 139, 146
retrograde axonal transport, 239
Puberty Reproductive systems
Radial arteries, 188, 189
5α reductase 2 deficiency virilization, 148 embryology, 147
Radial dilator muscles, 328
hypothalamic lesions, 338, 341 congenital abnormalities, 147–148
Radial glia, 240
oogenesis, 6 extraperitoneal connective tissue, 89
Radial nerves
pineal lesions, 341 gonads, 3, 4, 91
brachial plexus, 179–181
Sertoli cells in seminiferous mesonephric tubules, 134, 136
lesions, 185, 187
tubules, 160 Mullerian inhibiting factor, 160
humeral head dislocation, 187, 191
spermatogenesis, 6 vagina, 136, 147
humeral mid shaft fracture, 185, 187,
Pubic symphysis, 88, 155 female pelvis, 151–152, 155
192
Pubic tubercle, 86, 88 histology
radiology, 192
Pubofemoral ligament, 202 ovaries, 167–170
sensory, 182, 183
Puborectalis muscle, 149 penis, 154
Radical mastectomy nerve lesion, 35,
Pudendal nerve testes and accessory glands, 156–165
186–187
course of, 137 uterus, 170, 171
Radiology
ejaculation, 164 vagina, 171
abdomen, 173–177
external anal sphincter, 108, 119, 152 male pelvis, 150, 153, 154
aortic arch, 66
external urethral sphincter, 138 Mullerian inhibiting factor, 3, 4, 160
central nervous system
pelvis, 150, 155 See also Ovaries; Penis; Testes; Uterus
brain, 320, 349, 365
perineum, 152 Respiratory bronchioles, 50
spinal cord, 83, 84
Pudendal vessels, 137 Respiratory distress syndrome, 39
costal notching, 67
Pulmonary arteries infants of diabetic mothers, 39, 52
esophagus and left atrium, 64
alveolar capillaries, 52 Respiratory system
knee joint, 206
coarctation of the aorta, 68 embryology, 36–38, 95
left internal carotid artery, 349
embryology, 211 histology, 45–53
thorax, 81–84
fetal circulation, 55 See also Lungs
transpyloric plane, 85
patent ductus arteriosus, 60 Rete testes, 156, 161
upper limbs, 192–193
persistent truncus arteriosus, 63 embryology, 147
Radius (radiology), 192
heart anatomy, 70 Reticular formation, 308
Raphe nuclei, 308
radiology, 81, 83, 84 cerebellar efferents, 314, 315
Receptive aphasia, 354
Pulmonary hypertension, 59 Reticular lamina, 16
Rectal vein anastomoses, 132, 133
Pulmonary hypoplasia, 38, 136 Retina
Rectouterine pouch, 8, 151
Pulmonary lymph nodes, 44 circadian rhythms, 341
Rectum, 107
Pulmonary neuroendocrine (PNE) cells, histology, 330
colonic aganglionosis, 103,
48, 49 lesions, 333
109, 231
Pulmonary semilunar valve visual field defects, 331–332
embryology, 135
auscultation, 74, 75 visual pathway, 325, 326, 330
fecal material, 118
blood flow, 72 Retrograde amnesia, 364
herniation into vagina, 152
murmurs, 74–76 Retroperitoneal organs
portacaval anastomoses, 133
Pulmonary veins duodenum, 106
Rectus sheath, 87–89
heart anatomy, 70 intraperitoneal versus, 99
Recurrent laryngeal nerves, 66, 67
blood flow, 72 parietal peritoneum, 98
Red nucleus, 278, 314, 315
heart embryology, 54 secondary retroperitonealization, 97, 99
Referred pain
Pupil diaphragmatic in shoulder, 80 Ribs
abnormalities, 329 intercostal spaces, 38
primitive gut tube structures, 95
constriction, 327, 328 Reflexes radiology, 82, 83
light reflex, 326, 327 accommodation convergence reaction, spleen laceration, 106
Purkinje cells (cerebellum), 310–313 Right colic artery, 128, 129
327
circuitry, 311–314 light reflex, 277 Right common iliac artery (radiology), 177
Right gastroepiploic artery, 127, 128
Purkinje fibers (heart), 74, 78, 79 motor system, 258–260, 271
Right lymphatic duct, 43–45
Putamen, 318, 320, 321 motoneuron lesions and, 260
Right to left shunts
Pylorus of stomach, 106, 111 prefrontal lesions, 352
as cyanotic, 58, 59, 61–63
pyloric stenosis, hypertrophic, 102 pupillary light reflex, 326, 327
fetal foramen ovale, 54, 55
Pyramids, 276, 279 vestibulo ocular, 282, 293, 294
fetal foramen secundum, 57
decussation, 256, 257, 271, 280 brain stem integrity, 295, 296
persistent truncus arteriosus, 62, 63
lesions, 303 Relative afferent pupil, 329
38
ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
pulmonary hypertension causing, 59 Semilunar valves. See Aortic semilunar Septum secundum, 57, 58
tetralogy of Fallot, 61, 63 valve; Pulmonary semilunar valve Serosa of GI tract, 108–110
transposition of the great vessels, 62, 63 Seminal vesicles Serous pericardium, 68–69
Rinne test, 293 ejaculation, 164 Sertoli cells, 160
Robin sequence, 215 histology, 163 androgen binding protein, 160
Pharmacology Biochemistry
Rods, 325, 330 male anatomy, 150, 156 blood–testis barrier, 157, 158, 160
rod stream, 356 Seminiferous tubules inhibin, 160
Romberg sign, 264, 315 embryology, 147 Mullerian inhibiting factor, 3, 4, 160
Rotator cuff, 191 histology, 157–158, 160, 161 seminiferous tubule, 157, 158, 160
Round ligaments of the hip, 202 male anatomy, 156 Shoulder
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Round ligaments of the uterus, 90, spermatogenesis, 157–158 collateral circulation, 190
151, 152 Sensory systems diaphragmatic referred pain, 80
Round window, 290, 291 anterolateral sensory system, 262, 263, rotator cuff, 191
Rubrospinal tract, 314 265–267, 269 Sigmoid arteries, 129, 130
Sigmoid colon, 107
brain stem, 277, 282
Patho S logy BehavioralScience/SocialSciences lesions, 265–267, 282 radiology, 173
Sigmoid sinuses, 219, 247
auditory system, 291–293
Saccule, 290, 291
Sinoatrial nodal artery, 76–78
cerebral cortex, 345, 351
vestibular system, 293, 294
parietal lobe, 353–355, 360 Sinoatrial (SA) node, 72, 78, 79
Sacral hiatus, 22
Sinus venarum, 54, 72
Sacral plexus, 251, 253 sensory homunculus, 345, 353
Microbiology Sinus venosus, 53, 54, 56, 72
deficits
Sacrococcygeal teratoma, 11
SITS muscles of rotator cuff, 191
auditory, 291, 292
Sacrum, 22, 88
Skeletal muscle innervation
axonal polyneuropathies, 227, 239
Salivary glands, 120–121
basal ganglia, 317, 322–324
olfactory lesions, 280, 360, 362
Saltatory conduction, 240
cerebellar functions, 309, 312, 315
spinal cord lesions, 264–269
Saphenous nerve, 199
corticobulbar fibers, 288–289
vestibular dysfunction, 295
Sartorius muscles, 201 corticospinal tract, 256, 257
visual, 325, 355, 356, 360, 364
Scala media, 290, 291 lesions, 257, 259–261, 315, 322–324
dorsal column–medial lemniscal system,
Scala tympani, 290, 291
reflexes, 258–260
262, 263–265
Scala vestibuli, 290, 291 upper and lower motoneurons,
Scalene triangle, 207, 208 brain stem, 263–265, 277 255–256
brain stem medial lemniscus, 277–280,
thoracic outlet syndrome, 207 See also Motor system
282
Scalp venous drainage, 217 Skull, 215–216
lesions in brain stem, 282
Scanning dysarthria, 315 arterial supply, 209
lesions in dorsal columns, 264, 265
Scaphoid, 193 dural venous sinuses, 218–219
medial lemniscus, 263–265, 271
Scapula (radiology), 82, 83 hemorrhages, 220–221
dorsal horn, 252–254
“winged scapula,” 35, 187 meninges, 217–218
embryology, 225, 226
Scarpa fascia, 87 orbital muscles, 221–222
lesions, 264–269, 271
urine extravasation, 154, 165 respiratory pathways, 46
lower limbs, 199
Schwann cells Sliding hiatal hernia, 106
axonal regeneration, 243, 244 olfactory system, 361–362 Small intestine, 114–115
histology, 241, 242 proprioception histology, 115–118
myelin formation, 240 Clarke nucleus, 255 Smoking tobacco
dorsal column–medial lemniscal sys
neuron structure, 236 lung cancer, 45
Schwannomas, 244, 306 tem, 263, 264 squamous metaplasia, 49
Sciatic nerves, 195, 196 spinocerebellar tracts, 267–268 Solitary nucleus, 279, 283
injuries, 198–199 radiology, 365 lesions, 303
sciatica, 25 reflex initiation, 258 Somatosensory cortex, 262–267
Sclera, 326 sensory neurons, 262, 263 Space of Disse, 122, 123, 125
Sclerotomes, 21 spinocerebellar tracts, 267–268 Spasmodic torticollis, 323
Scrotum thalamus, 335, 336 Spastic bladder, 138, 272
cancer, 91 tongue, 213 Spastic paresis, 260, 261, 347
embryology, 147 upper limbs, 182–183 Spastic weakness, 257, 261, 269, 271, 273,
fluid accumulation, 165 carpal tunnel syndrome and, 183, 190 307
vestibular system, 293–296 Spermatic cord, 90–91
hydrocele, 92
vibratory Spermatic fascia
Secondary palate, 214
dorsal column–medial lemniscal sys external, 87, 89, 91
Secondary retroperitonealization, 97, 99
tem, 263, 264 internal, 89, 91
Secundum atrial septal defect, 58, 59
spinal cord lesion, 269 Spermatids
Selectins, 15
Septal nuclei, 361, 363 meiosis, 5
Semicircular canals, 290, 291
Semicircular ducts, 290, 291 Septomarginal trabecula, 73, 79 seminiferous tubule, 157, 158
caloric test, 295 Septum pellucidum, 276 spermatogenesis, 6, 158
vestibular system, 293, 294 Septum primum, 57, 58 spermiogenesis, 6, 15
384
INDEX
Spermatocytes Spinal meninges, 25–27, 217 radiology, 173–175
meiosis, 5, 158 epidural anesthesia, 27, 29 sliding hiatal hernia, 106
seminiferous tubule, 157, 158 lumbar puncture, 27, 29 ulcers and artery erosion, 127
spermatogenesis, 6, 158 Spinal nerves Straight sinus, 219
Spermatogenesis, 4, 6, 8 anatomy, 28, 251–255 Striatum, 317–319
meiosis, 4, 5 transition point, 29 Stria vascularis, 290
seminiferous tubule, 157–158 cauda equina, 27 Styloid process embryology, 211
Spermatogonia denticulate ligaments, 26 Subacute combined degeneration,
pre meiosis, 5, 158 parasympathetic nervous system, 32, 33 273, 274
seminiferous tubule, 157–158 as peripheral nervous system, 27, 225 Subarachnoid hemorrhage, 221, 350
spermatogenesis, 6, 157–158 sympathetic nervous system, 30–32 subarachnoid space, 218
Spermatozoa vertebral column, 22, 24 Subarachnoid space, 217, 218
capacitation, 8 exiting, 29 cerebrospinal fluid circulation, 246, 247,
ductuli efferentes, 161 herniated disk, 25 249
ejaculate, 163, 164 intervertebral foramina, 24, 26, 29 inferior limit, 27
ejaculation, 164 Spinocerebellar tracts, 267–268 lumbar puncture, 27, 29
epididymis, 162 lesions, 268 spinal, 26, 27
fertilization, 8 Spinothalamic tracts, 265, 266, 271 Subclavian arteries, 188, 189
flagella, 18 anterolateral sensory system, 262, 263, embryology, 211
Kartagener syndrome, 18, 48 265–267, 269 head and neck, 209
seminiferous tubule, 157 brain stem, 277–280, 282 radiology, 82
spermiogenesis, 6, 159 pons, 284 scalene triangle, 207, 208
vasectomy, 162 hypothalamic fibers, 277–279, 282 Subclavian veins, 66
Spermiogenesis, 6, 159 midbrain, 287 lymphatic drainage, 43, 45, 65, 67
Sphincter of Oddi, 105, 107, 122, 125 pons, 284 scalene triangle and, 207, 208
Sphincter urethrae muscle, 149 lesions, 265–267, 282, 303–305 Subcostal plane, 85, 86
Spina bifida, 226, 228 unilateral, 265 Subdural hematoma, 221, 350
Spinal cord midbrain, 287 Subdural space, 218
accessory nerve origin, 275, 276 Spinous processes of vertebrae, 23 Sublingual salivary glands, 120, 121
anatomy, 251–255, 269, 271 Spiral ganglion, 290–292 Submandibular salivary glands,
gray/white matter, 251, 252, Spleen, 106 120, 121
257, 269 embryology, 97, 102 Submucosa of GI tract, 108–110
bladder atonic/spastic, 138 dorsal embryonic mesentery, 95, 102 Subscapularis muscles, 191
cancers, 244, 249 peritoneal membranes, 100 Substantia nigra
central nervous system definition, 225 radiology, 174 basal ganglia, 317, 319
embryology, 225, 226 ribs lacerating, 106 midbrain, 278, 287
inferior limit in adults, 27 Splenic artery, 106, 127, 128 Parkinson disease, 322, 323
lesions, 271–274 Splenic flexure Subthalamus, 338
diagnosis of, 307 bowel ischemia and, 130 subthalamic nucleus, 317, 338
motor system, 257, 259–261, 269 radiology, 173 lesions, 322, 323, 338
sensory systems, 264–269 Splenic vein, 131, 132 Suckling reflex, 352
meninges, 25–27 radiology, 175 Sulci of cerebral cortex, 343–344
cranial versus, 217 Splenium, 344, 356 Sulci of heart, 70
motor system Splenorenal ligament, 95, 97, 101, 102, 106 Superficial fibular nerves, 195, 196, 199
alpha motoneurons, 254–256 pancreas tail, 105 injury, 199
corticospinal tract, 256, 257, 277 Spontaneous abortion and hCG levels, 9 Superficial inguinal ring, 87, 89, 90
gamma motoneurons, 254–256 Sry gene, 3 Superficial perineal fascia, 153
lesions, 257, 259–261, 269, 271 Stapedius, 290 Superficial perineal pouch, 152, 153
motor neurons, 255, 256, 271 Stapes, 290, 291 pudendal innervation, 155
reflexes, 258–260 embryology, 211 Superior colliculi, 276–278
radiology, 83, 84 Stellate cells (cerebellum), 311, 313 lesion, 306, 308
sections, 269–270 Stellate cells (liver), 125 midbrain, 287
sensory systems Stenosis of heart valves, 74, 75 Superior gluteal nerves, 197
anterolateral, 262, 263, 265–267, 269, Stensen’s ducts, 121 injuries, 198
277 Stereocilia, 17, 162 lumbosacral plexus, 195, 196
dorsal column–medial lemniscal Sternal angle (of Louis), 63, 64, 66 Superior mesenteric artery, 126, 128, 129
system, 262, 263–265, 277 Sternocleidomastoid muscles, 208 radiology, 175, 176
lesions, 264–269, 271 Sternum (radiology), 83 Superior mesenteric vein, 131, 132
neurons, 262, 263 Stomach, 106 radiology, 176
spinocerebellar tracts, 267–268 embryology, 95 Superior olivary nuclei, 279, 285, 291, 292
sympathetic outflow, 32, 233 H. pylori infection, 114 Superior pancreaticoduodenal arteries,
vertebrae protecting, 21 histology, 110–114 127, 128
vertebral canal, 23, 251 peritoneal membranes, 100 Superior rectal artery, 129, 130
38
ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Superior sagittal sinus, 217, 219 Terminal ganglia, 32, 33 Thymus gland
cerebrospinal fluid circulation, 246, 249 Testes anterior mediastinum, 64
dural venous sinus drainage, 247 cancer, 91 ectopic, 215
Superior temporal gyrus, 292 descent, 91–92 embryology, 212
Superior vena cava, 66 cryptorchidism, 91, 148 superior mediastinum, 66
Pharmacology Biochemistry
radiology, 81, 83 embryology, 3, 4, 91, 147 tumors, 64
Suprachiasmatic nucleus, 338–340 congenital abnormalities, 148 Thyroglossal duct, 212, 213
circadian rhythms, 341 mesonephric tubules, 134, 136 cyst, 215
Supraoptic nuclei, 338–340 histology, 156–165 Thyroid cartilage embryology, 211
lesions, 338, 340 blood–testis barrier, 157, 158, 160 Thyroid gland
Physiology MedicalGenetics
Suprascapular nerves, 182 male anatomy, 150, 154, 156 ectopic, 215
injury, 183, 184, 187 spermatic cord, 90–91 embryology, 212, 213
Supraspinatus muscles, 191 spermatogenesis, 4, 6, 8 laryngeal nerve lesion, 67
Sural nerve, 199 meiosis, 4, 5 Tibial collateral ligaments, 203
Surfactant Testicular artery, 90 Tibial nerves
Pathologyalveolar, 51, 52 BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Testicular feminization syndrome, 148 injuries, 198
Clara cells, 50 Testis determining factor (TDF), 3, 4 lumbosacral plexus, 195, 196
cystic fibrosis, 49 Testosterone sensory, 199
corticosteroids for fetal synthesis, 52 Leydig cells synthesizing, 3, 160 Tibias
hyaline membrane disease, 39 testis embryology, 3 ankle joints, 205
Microbiololguyng embryology, 37 Tetralogy of Fallot, 61, 63 knee joints, 203–205
respiratory distress syndrome, 39, 52 Thalamus radiology, 206
Suspensory ligament of ovary, 152 anatomy, 276, 277, 320, 344 shaft fractures, 201
female pelvis, 151, 152 thalamic nuclei, 335, 336 Tight junctions, 16–18
Sympathetic nervous system, 30–32, basal ganglia, 317–319, 324 blood–brain barrier, 242, 249
232–233 cerebellar efferents, 314, 315 choroid plexus, 247, 249
autonomic nervous system, 30, 230, 231 embryology, 227 epithelial polarity, 13, 16
ejaculation, 164 functions, 335, 336 microfilaments, 15
eye innervation, 221, 326 limbic system, 361, 363 paracellular pathway, 13
gastrointestinal system, 110 thalamic pain syndrome, 336 Sertoli cells, 157, 160
salivary glands, 120 thalamocortical projections, 346 Tissue types, 13
heart innervation, 79 ventropostero lateral nucleus, Tongue
hypothalamus, 339 335, 336 embryology, 211, 213
internal anal sphincter, 107, 152 anterolateral system, 262, lingual cyst, 215
micturition, 138 265–267 jugular foramen syndrome, 217
postganglionic neurons, 30 dorsal column–medial lemniscal Tourette syndrome, 322, 323
preganglionic neurons, 30 system, 262–264 Trabeculae carneae, 72, 73
sympathetic trunks, 63 Thebesian veins, 77 Trachea
thoracolumbar outflow, 30–32, 232, 233 Theca externa, 166, 167 carina, 67
Synapsis, 4, 5 Theca folliculi, 166, 167 embryology, 36–38
Syncytiotrophoblast, 7–9 Theca interna, 166, 167 histology, 46–49
Syringomyelia, 228, 273, 274 lutein cells, 168–169 radiology, 82, 83
Systole in valvular defects, 74–76 Thoracic (descending) aorta, 64 as respiratory pathway, 46
radiology, 83, 84 superior mediastinum, 66, 67
T Thoracic cavity tracheoesophageal fistula, 37, 38
Tabes dorsalis, 272, 274 boundaries, 38, 39 Tracheobronchial lymph nodes, 44
“Talk and die” syndrome, 350 intercostal spaces, 38, 39 Tracheoesophageal fistula, 37, 38
Tanycytes, 242 lymphatic system, 43–45 Tracheoesophageal septum, 37
Tau protein, 238 pleura, 39–41 Transcortical apraxia, 354, 358
Telencephalon, 227 radiology, 81–84 Transition point of spinal nerves, 29
Temperature regulation, 338, 341 transverse section, 39 Transport systems. See Cellular transport
Temporal lobe, 357, 360 Thoracic diaphragm. See Diaphragm systems
anatomy, 344 Thoracic duct, 43–45 Transposition of the great vessels, 62, 63
visual association cortex, 355–356 posterior mediastinum, 65 Transpyloric plane, 85
lesions, 356 superior mediastinum, 67 Transtentorial herniation, 329
Wernicke area, 353 Thoracic inlet, 38, 63, 64 Transversalis fascia, 88, 89, 91
lesions, 353–354, 357, 360 Thoracic outlet, 207 Transverse cervical ligament, 152
Teniae coli, 118 syndrome, 207 Transverse colon, 107
Tension pneumothorax, 40 Thoracic vertebrae, 22 radiology, 173
Tensor tympani, 290 Thoracodorsal nerve, 35 Transverse processes of vertebrae, 23
Tentorium cerebelli, 218, 219 Thoracoepigastric vein anastomoses, 132 Transverse sinuses, 219, 247
Teres minor muscles, 191 Thorax radiology, 81–84 Transversus abdominis muscle, 88, 89
Terminal bronchiole, 50 Thymoma, 64 Trapezium, 19
386
INDEX
Trapezius muscles, 208 carpal tunnel, 190 implantation, 7, 8
Trapezoid, 193 median nerve lesions, 186, 187 pelvis, 151, 152
Treacher Collins syndrome, 215 syndrome, 183, 190, 193 prolapse, 152
Tremors, 315 embryology, 210 Utricle, 290, 291
“Trendelenburg gait,” 198 innervation vestibular system, 293, 294
Tricuspid valve brachial plexus, 179–182
auscultation, 74, 75 brachial plexus injuries, 183–187 V
blood flow, 72, 73 segmental, 182 Vagina
murmurs, 74–76 sensory, 182–183 embryology, 136, 147
Trigeminal nerves (CN V) radiology, 192–193 herniation into, 152
brain stem, 275–280, 287 rotator cuff, 191 histology, 171
cavernous sinus, 219, 220, 247 Urachus, 136 pelvis, 151, 152
corticobulbar fibers, 288, 289 fistulas or sinuses, 137 perineum, 155
embryology, 211 patent, 137 Vagus nerves (CN X)
functions, 280 Ureteric bud, 134–136 brain stem, 275–277, 279
lesions, 280, 303–305 Ureters corticobulbar fibers, 288
medulla, 283 anatomy, 137 dorsal motor nucleus, 283
nuclei, 285–286 double, 137 embryology, 211
Trigone of the bladder, 138 embryology, 135 heart innervation, 79
embryology, 136 female pelvis, 151, 152 lesions, 303
Triquetrum, 193 “water under bridge,” 152 nuclei, 283
Trisomy 13 holoprosencephaly, 228 radiology, 177 superior mediastinum, 66, 67
Trochlear nerves (CN IV) Urethra Valsalva maneuver in defecation, 119
brain stem, 275–278, 287 compression by prostate, 150 Valvular insufficiency, 74
cavernous sinus, 219, 220, 247 embryology, 136 Valvular regurgitation, 74
thrombosis, 220 female, 139, 151, 155 Vas deferens. See Ductus deferens
embryology, 211 laceration of, 165 Vasectomy, 162
functions, 280 male, 138–139 Venae cordis minimae, 77
lesions, 280 corpus spongiosus, 150, 154 Ventral embryonic mesentery,
nuclei, 287 ejaculation, 164 95, 97
orbital muscles, 221 prostate, 164 Ventral horn, 254–255
vestibular fibers, 293, 294 neck of bladder, 138 lower motoneurons, 255–257
Trophoblast, 7, 8 spermatozoa, 162 as motor, 252–254
Truncus arteriosus septation, 60–63 sphincters, 138, 149, 150 spinal cord sections, 269, 270
Tubal ectopic pregnancy, 8 innervation, 138 Ventral rami, 28, 32, 233, 252
Tuber cinereum, 344 Urinary bladder. See Bladder Ventral root of spinal nerve
Tumors. See Cancers Urinary system denticulate ligaments, 26
Tunica albuginea, 156 anatomy, 137–139 as motor, 28, 252, 254, 255
Tympanic membrane, 290, 291 embryology, 134–136 Ventricles (brain)
embryology, 212 congenital abnormalities, 136–137 anatomy, 245, 246
renal agenesis, 38, 136 cerebrospinal fluid, 245, 246 (See also
U histology, 139–146 Cerebrospinal fluid)
Ulna (radiology), 192 renal calculi, 137 embryology, 227
Ulnar arteries, 188, 189 Urination. See Micturition ependymal cells, 242
Ulnar nerves, 182, 183 Urogenital diaphragm, 149 hydrocephalus, 228, 248
brachial plexus, 179–181 deep perineal pouch, 153 Ventricles (heart)
lesions, 186, 187 female pelvis, 151, 152 anatomy of heart, 70
radiology, 192, 193 male pelvis, 150, 154 blood flow, 72–73
Umbilical arteries, 55, 56 pudendal innervation, 155 borders, 69, 70
Umbilical region, 86 Urogenital ridge, 3, 4, 91 surfaces, 70
midgut referred pain, 95 extraperitoneal connective tissue, 89 embryology
Umbilical vein, 54–56 Urogenital sinus, 135–136 fetal circulation, 54–56
Umbilicus Urogenital triangle, 152–153, 155 heart tube, 53, 54
patent urachus, 137 Urorectal septum, 135, 136 ventricular septal defects,
portacaval anastomoses, 133 Uterine artery, 152 59, 63
Uncinate process, 105 “water under bridge,” 152 ventricular septation, 59
ventral pancreatic bud, 101, 102 Uterine tube, 151, 152 radiology, 81, 84
Uncus, 276 Uterosacral ligament, 152 Vermis
uncal herniation, 329 Uterus anatomy, 278, 279, 309
Undescended testes, 91, 148 anatomy, 151, 152, 165, 170 function, 309, 310, 314
Upper limbs embryology, 147 lesions, 313, 315
arterial supply, 187–190 fertilization, 7, 8 congenital malformations, 228
collateral circulation, 189, 190 histology, 170, 171 radiology, 365
38
ANATOMY
Anatomy Immunology
Vertebral arteries, 300–301 pleura, 39, 40 Weber syndrome, 307
cerebral cortex, 346, 348 pleural reflections, 41 Weber test, 293
occlusion, 359 serosa of GI tract, 108 Wernicke Korsakoff syndrome, 336, 364
Vertebral column Visual agnosia, 356 Wernicke’s oral comprehension area
curvatures, 22 Visual association cortex, 351, 355–356 anatomy, 320
Pharmacology Biochemistry
dural sac inferior limit, 27 Visual cortex, 351, 355 cerebral cortex, 351, 353
embryology, 21, 210 frontal eye field, 296–298 auditory system, 292
intervertebral disks, 22–24 lesions, 352, 360 lesions, 353–354, 357, 360
intervertebral foramina, 22–24, 26 lateral geniculate body, 332 Wharton’s ducts, 121
ligaments, 24 lesions, 333, 355 White rami, 32, 233
Physiology MedicalGenetics
radiology, 82–84 line of Gennari, 346, 355 Wilson disease, 322, 323
spinal cord inferior limit, 27 pupillary light reflex, 327 “Winged scapula,” 35, 187
vertebrae, 21–23 Visual pathways Withdrawal reflex, 260
vertebral arch, 23 circadian rhythms, 341 WNT4 gene, 3
vertebral canal, 23 eyeball, 325, 326 Wolffian ducts, 3, 4, 136
Pathology vertebral notches, 23 BehavioralScience/SocialSciences optic chiasm, 330 embryology, 134, 136
Vertigo, 295 retina, 330 duct of Gartner, 147
Vesicouterine pouch, 151 suprachiasmatic nucleus, 339, 340 Wrist
Vestibular fibers, 293 thalamus, 335, 336 median nerve lesion, 186
Vestibular nuclei, 285, 293, 294 visual field defects, 331–333 radiology, 193
Microbiolocgeyrebellar efferents, 314, 315 visual reflexes, 326–329 ulnar nerve lesion, 186
lesions, 294, 303–305 Vitamin A “wrist drop,” 185, 187
Vestibular system, 293–296 deficiency and night blindness, 325 Writer’s cramp, 323
caloric test, 295, 296
liver storage, 125
dysfunction, 295 Vitamin B1 and neural degeneration, 339 Y
vestibulo ocular reflex, 282, 293, 294 Vitamin B12 Y chromosome Sry gene, 3
brain stem integrity, 295, 296
bacteria of GI tract, 110 Yolk sac
Vestibule, 151, 155
intrinsic factor, 113 derivatives, 12, 229
Vestibulocochlear nerves (CN VIII)
pernicious anemia, 113 gonad embryology, 4
brain stem, 275–277, 279, 287
subacute combined degeneration, hypoblast origins, 8–9
cochlear division, 290, 291
273, 274 primitive gut tube, 94, 96
functions, 281
Vitamin K, 110
lesions, 281, 292, 294, 303, 304
Vitamins stored in liver, 125 Z
schwannomas, 244, 306
Vitelline duct
vestibular system, 293, 294 Zona occludens, 16, 18
ileal diverticulum, 103
Vestibulo ocular reflex, 282, 293, 294 See also Tight junctions
primitive gut tube, 96
brain stem integrity, 295, 296 Zona pellucida
vitelline fistula, 103
Vibratory sense acrosome enzymes, 159
Vitelline fistula, 103
dorsal column–medial lemniscal system, cortical reaction, 8
Vitelline veins, 54
263, 264 fertilization, 7, 8
Vitreous humor, 326
follicular development, 166–168
spinal cord lesion, 269
Volvulus, 103
Visceral layer, 39 graafian follicle, 166, 168
VPM (ventroposteromedial nucleus), 286 implantation, 8
pericardium, 68–69
peritoneum, 98 polar body, 168
embryology, 98 W Zonula adherens, 16–18
intraperitoneal organs, 98, 99 Waiter’s tip syndrome, 183–184 Zygapophyseal joints, 21, 24
secondary retroperitonealization, 97, Wallenberg syndrome, 303 Zygotes, 7, 8
Wallerian degeneration, 243, 244 Zymogen granules, 121
99
38






