PRECLINICAL
BIOCHEMISTRY
AND
MEDICAL
GENETICS
REVIEW
2023
®
FOR USMLE STEP 1 AND
®
COMLEX USA LEVEL 1
USMLE® and United States Medical Licensing Examination® is ajoint program of the National Board of Medical Examiners (NBME) and the Federation of State Medical Boards
(FSMB), which are not affiliated with Kaplan and were not involved inthe production of, and do not endorse, this product. COMLEX USA® is aregistered trademark of the National
Board of Osteopathic Medical Examiners, Inc. (NBOME), which is not affiliated with Kaplan and was not involved inthe production of, and does not endorse, this product
PRECLINICAL
BIOCHEMISTRY
AND MEDICAL
GENETICS
REVIEW
2023
FOR USMLE® STEP 1 AND
COMLEX USA® LEVEL 1
USMLE® and United States Medical Licensing Examination® is ajoint program of the National Board of Medical Examiners (NBME) and the Federation
of State Medical Boards (FSMB), which are not affiliated with Kaplan and were not involved in the production of, and do not endorse, this product.
COMLEX USA® isaregistered trademark ofthe National Board ofOsteopathic Medical Examiners, Inc. (NBOME), which is not affiliated with Kaplan an
was not involved inthe production of,and does not endorse, this product.
USMLE® and United States Medical Licensing Examination® is a joint program of the National Board of Medical Examiners
(NBME) and the Federation of State Medical Boards (FSMB), which are not affiliated with Kaplan and were not involved in
the production of, and do not endorse, this product.
COMLEX USA® is a registered trademark of the National Board of Osteopathic Medical Examiners, Inc. (NBOME), which is
not affiliated with Kaplan and was not involved in the production of, and does not endorse, this product.
This publication is designed to provide accurate information in regard to the subject matter covered as of its publication
date, with the understanding that knowledge and best practice constantly evolve. The publisher is not engaged in rendering
medical, legal, accounting, or other professional service. Ifmedical or legal advice or other expert assistance is required,
the services of a competent professional should be sought. This publication is not intended for use in clinical practice or
the delivery of medical care. To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the Editors assume any liability for any
injury and/or damage to persons or property arising out of or related to any use of the material contained in this book.
© 2023 by Kaplan North America, LLC
Published by Kaplan Medical, a division of Kaplan North America, LLC.
1515 West Cypress Creek Road
Fort Lauderdale, Florida 33309
All rights reserved. The text of this publication, or any part thereof, may not be reproduced in any manner whatsoever without
written permission from the publisher.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Course ISBN: 978 1 5062 8445 3
Course Kit ISBN: 978 1 5062 8465 1
Retail ISBN: 978 1 5062 8443 9
Retail Kit ISBN: 978 1 5062 8463 7
Kit items come as a set and should not be broken out and sold separately.
Kaplan Publishing print books are available at special quantity discounts to use for sales promotions, employee premiums,
or educational purposes. For more information or to purchase books, please call the Simon &Schuster special sales
department at 866 506 1949
Editor
Sam Turco, PhD
Professor, Department of Biochemistry
University of Kentucky College of Medicine
Lexington, KY
CONTRIBUTORS
Roger Lane, PhD
Professor, Department of Biochemistry
University of South Alabama College of Medicine
Mobile, AL
Ryan M. Harden, MD, MS
Physician, Family Medicine
Gateway Family Health Clinic, Ltd
Sandstone, MN
Assistant Professor, Department of Family Medicine and Community Health
University of Minnesota Medical School, Duluth Campus
Duluth, M
We want to hear what you think. What do you like or not like about the Notes?
Please email us at medfeedback@kaplan.com
Table of Contents
PART I: BIOCHEMISTRY
CHAPTER 1: Nucleic Acid Structure and Organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
CHAPTER 2: DNA Replication and Repair . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
CHAPTER 3: Transcription and RNA Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
CHAPTER 4: The Genetic Code, Mutations, and Translation . . . . . . . . . . . 47
CHAPTER 5: Regulation of Eukaryotic Gene Expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
CHAPTER 6: Genetic Strategies in Therapeutics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
CHAPTER 7: Techniques of Genetic Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
CHAPTER 8: Amino Acids, Proteins, and Enzymes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
CHAPTER 9: Hormones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
CHAPTER 10: Vitamins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
CHAPTER 11: Energy Metabolism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 159
CHAPTER 12: Glycolysis and Pyruvate Dehydrogenase . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
CHAPTER 13: Citric Acid Cycle and Oxidative Phosphorylation . . . . . . . . . 189
CHAPTER 14: Glycogen, Gluconeogenesis, and the Hexose
Monophosphate Shunt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 201
CHAPTER 15: Lipid Synthesis and Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 217
CHAPTER 16: Lipid Mobilization and Catabolism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 237
CHAPTER 17: Amino Acid Metabolism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 259
CHAPTER 18: Purine and Pyrimidine Metabolism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 283
PART II: MEDICAL GENETICS
CHAPTER 1: Single Gene Disorders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 297
CHAPTER 2: Population Genetics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 325
CHAPTER 3: Cytogenetics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 339
CHAPTER 4: Recombination Frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 357
CHAPTER 5: Genetic Diagnosis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 369
INDEX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 385
v
PART I
BIOCHEMISTR

Nucleic Acid
1
Structure and Organization
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Explain information related to nucleotide structure and nomenclature
❏ Use knowledge of organization of DNA versus RNA
❏ Understand general features of a chromosome
CENTRAL DOGMA OF MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
An organism must be able to store and preserve its genetic information, pass that
information along to future generations, and express that information as it carries
out all the processes of life. The major steps involved in handling genetic informa
tion are illustrated by the central dogma of molecular biology.
Replication
Transcription Translation
DNA RNA Protein
Reverse
transcription
Figure FigureI 1I11. 1.CenCteranltral DoDgomgama of MoolefculaMroleculaBriology Biology
Genetic information is stored in the base sequence of DNA molecules. Ultimately,
during the process of gene expression, this information is used to synthesize all the
proteins made by an organism.
HY HY
Classically, a gene is a unit of the DNA that encodes a particular protein or RNA
molecule. Although this definition is now complicated by our increased appreMciYa MY
tion of the ways in which genes may be expressed, it is still useful as a working
definition. LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Gene Expression and DNA Replication
Gene expression and DNA replication are compared below. TranMscEriDptIiUonM, YIELDthe first MEDIUM YIELD
stage in gene expression, involves transfer of information found in a
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
double stranded DNA molecule to the base sequence of a single stranded RNA
molecule. If the RNA molecule is a messenger RNA, then the process known as
translation converts the information in the RNA base sequence to the amino acid
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
sequence of a protein.
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
3
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
When cells divide, each daughter cell must receive an accurate copy of the
genetic information. DNA replication is the process in which each chromosome is
duplicated before cell division.
MedicalGenetics Table I 1 1. Comparison of Gene Expression and DNA Replication
Gene Expression DNA Replication
Produces all the proteins an Duplicates the chromosomes
organism requires before cell division
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Transcription of DNA: RNA copy of DNA copy of entire chromosome
a small section of a chromosome (average size of human chromo
(average size of human gene, some, 108 nucleotide pairs)
104–105 nucleotide pairs)
Transcription occurs in the nucleus Occurs during S phase
throughout interphase
Translation of RNA (protein synthe Replication in nucleus
sis) occurs in the cytoplasm
throughout the cell cycle
The concept of the cell cycle can be used to describe the timing of some of these
events in a eukaryotic cell. The M phase (mitosis) is the time in which the cell
divides to form 2 daughter cells. Interphase describes the time between 2 cell
divisions or mitoses. Gene expression occurs throughout all stages of interphase.
Interphase is subdivided as follows:
• G1 phase (gap 1) is a period of cellular growth preceding DNA synthesis.
Cells that have stopped cycling, such as muscle and nerve cells, are said to
be in a special state called G0.
• S phase (DNA synthesis) is the period of time during which DNA replica
tion occurs. At the end of S phase, each chromosome has doubled its DNA
content and is composed of 2 identical sister chromatids linked at the
NOTE
centromere.
Many chemotherapeutic agents function by
• G2 phase (gap 2) is a period of cellular growth after DNA synthesis but
targeting specific phases of the cell cycle.
preceding mitosis. Replicated DNA is checked for any errors before cell
This is a frequently tested area on the exam. division.
Some commonly tested agents with phase of
cell cycle they target:
• S phase: methotrexate, 5 fluorouracil, M
hydroxyurea
G0
• G2 phase: bleomycin
G2 G1
• M phase: paclitaxel, vincristine,
vinblastine
S
• Non cell cycle specific:
cyclophosphamide, cisplatin
Figure I 1 2. The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
Figure I 1 2. Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
CHAPTER 1 | NUCLEIC ACID STRUCTURE AND ORGANIzATION
Control of the cell cycle is accomplished at checkpoints between the various phases
by strategic proteins such as cyclins and cyclin dependent kinases. These check
points ensure that cells will not enter the next phase of the cycle until the molecu
lar events in the previous cell cycle phase are concluded.
Reverse transcription, which produces DNA copies of an RNA, is more commonly
associated with life cycles of retroviruses, which replicate and express their
genome through a DNA intermediate (an integrated provirus). Reverse transcrip
tion also occurs to a limited extent in human cells, where it plays a role in amplify
ing certain highly repetitive sequences in the DNA (Chapter 7).
NUCLEOTIDE STRUCTURE AND NOMENCLATURE
Nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) are assembled from nucleotides, which consist of 3
components: a nitrogenous base, a 5 carbon sugar (pentose), and phosphate.
Five Carbon Sugars
HY HY
Nucleic acids (as well as nucleosides and nucleotides) are classified according to
the pentose they contain. If the pentose is ribose, the nucleic acid is RNA (riMboY MY
nucleic acid); if the pentose is deoxyribose, the nucleic acid is DNA (deoxyribo
nucleic acid). LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Bases
There are 2 types of nitrogen containing bases commonly found MEDIiUnMnucleotidYesI:ELD MEDIUM YIELD
purines and pyrimidines.
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
Purines Pyrimidines FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
NH2 O NH2 O O
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
N N HN N N NH HN CH3
N N H2N N N O N O N O N
H H H H H
Adenine Guanine Cytosine Uracil Thymine
Figure I 1 3. Bases Commonly Found in Nucleic Acids
Figure I 1 3. Bases Commonly Found in Nucleic Acids
• Purines contain 2 rings in their structure. The purines commonly found
in nucleic acids are adenine (A) and guanine (G); both are found in DNA
and RNA. Other purine metabolites, not usually found in nucleic acids,
include xanthine, hypoxanthine, and uric acid.
• Pyrimidines have only 1 ring. Cytosine (C) is present in both DNA and
RNA. Thymine (T) is usually found only in DNA, whereas uracil (U) is
found only in RNA.
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Nucleosides and Nucleotides
Nucleosides are formed by covalently linking a base to the number 1 carbon of a
sugar. The numbers identifying the carbons of the sugar are labeled with “primes”
in nucleosides and nucleotides to distinguish them from the carbons of the purine
MedicalGenetics
or pyrimidine base.
Nucleotides are formed when 1 or more phosphate groups is attached to the 5′
carbon of a nucleoside. Nucleoside di and triphosphates are high energy
compounds because of the hydrolytic energy associated with the acid anhydride
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
bonds.
Uridine Monophosphate Deoxyguanosine Monophosphate
(UMP) (dGMP)
O O
ATP N
HN HN
NH2
N
High energy N N H2N N N
bonds
N N
O O
O O O O–5 ́ 5 ́
O P O CH2 O O P O CH2 O
O OP–P O O–P O O CH2 O
1 ́ O: 1 ́
4 ́ 4 ́
O–OH OH 3 ́ 2 ́ 3 ́ 2 ́
OH OH OH
Figure I 1 6. High Energy Bonds in
Figure I 1 5. High Energy Bonds in a Nucleo
a Nucleoside Triphosphate
side Triphosphate Figure FigurIe 1 5I.1E4x.amEpxleasmples ooff NuNculecoletoidtiedses
The nomenclature for the commonly found bases, nucleosides, and nucleotides is
shown below. Note that the “deoxy” part of the names deoxythymidine, dTMP,
etc., is sometimes understood and not expressly stated because thymine is almost
always found attached to deoxyribose.
6
CHAPTER 1 | NUCLEIC ACID STRUCTURE AND ORGANIzATION
Table I 1 2. Nomenclature of Important Bases, Nucleosides, and Nucleotides
Base Nucleoside Nucleotides
Adenine Adenosine AMP (dAMP) ADP (dADP) ATP (dATP)
(Deoxyadenosine)
Guanine Guanosine GMP (dGMP) GDP (dGDP) GTP (dGTP)
(Deoxyguanosine)
Cytosine Cytidine CMP (dCMP) CDP (dCDP) CTP (dCTP)
(Deoxycytidine)
Uracil Uridine UMP (dUMP) UDP (dUDP) UTP (dUTP)
(Deoxyuridine)
Thymine (Deoxythymidine) (dTMP) (dTDP) (dTTP)
Names of nucleosides and nucleotides attached to deoxyribose are shown in parentheses.
NOTE
NUCLEIC ACIDS Nucleic Acids
Nucleic acids are polymers of nucleotides joined by 3′, 5′ phosphodiester bonds; • Nucleotides linked by 3′, 5′
that is, a phosphate group links the 3′ carbon of a sugar to the 5′ carbon of the next phosphodiester bonds
sugar in the chain. Each strand has a distinct 5′ end and 3′ end, and thus has polar
ity. A phosphate group is often found at the 5′ end, and a hydroxyl group is often • Have distinct 3′ and 5′ ends,
found at the 3′ end. thus polarity
The base sequence of a nucleic acid strand is written by convention, in the 5′→3′ • Sequence always specified as 5′→3′
direction (left to right). According to this convention, the sequence of the strand
on the left in Figure I 1 6 must be written 5′ TCAG 3′ or TCAG:
• If written backward, the ends must be labeled: 3′ GACT 5′
• The positions of phosphates may be shown: pTpCpApG
• In DNA, a “d” (deoxy) may be included: dTdCdAdG
In eukaryotes, DNA is generally double stranded (dsDNA) and RNA is generally
single stranded (ssRNA). Exceptions occur in certain viruses, some of which have
ssDNA genomes and some of which have dsRNA genomes.
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
5 ́ Phosphate 3 ́ Hydroxyl
O
H
MedicalGenetics O P O H3C N
O H N OH
O
5 ́CH2 T N H N A N
O 3 ́
5 ́ N N 3 ́
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences O
3 ́ O
5 ́CH2
O
O
O P O H O P O
N
N H O O
O
C N H N G N
5 ́CH2
O 3 ́
N N
O H N
3 ́ O
H
5 ́CH2
O
H
O
N
N H O CH3
O P O O P O
O N A N H N T
5 ́CH2 N N O
O
O
3 ́
3 ́
O
O
H 5 ́CH2
O P O N
O H N O
O
O P O
N G N H N C
5 ́CH2
N N O
O
N H O
H 3 ́
3 ́
O
5 ́CH2
OH
3 ́ O 5 ́
O P O
O
3 ́ Hydroxyl 5 ́ Phosphate
Figure I 1 6. Hydrogen Bonded Base Pairs in DNA
Figure I 1 7. Hydrogen Bonded Base Pairs in DNA
CHAPTER 1 | NUCLEIC ACID STRUCTURE AND ORGANIzATION
DNA Structure NOTE
Some of the features of double stranded DNA include: Using Chargaff’s Rules
• The 2 strands are antiparallel (opposite in direction). In dsDNA (or dsRNA)
(ds = double stranded)
• The 2 strands are complementary. A always pairs with T (2 hydrogen
bonds), and G always pairs with C (3 hydrogen bonds). Thus, the base % A= % T (% U)
sequence on one strand defines the base sequence on the other strand.
% G = % C
• Because of the specific base pairing, the amount of A equals the amount of
T, and the amount of G equals the amount of C. Thus, total purines equals % purines = % pyrimidines
total pyrimidines. These properties are known as Chargaff’s rules.
Asample of DNA has 10% G;
With minor modification (substitution of U for T) these rules also apply to what is the % T?
dsRNA.
10% G + 10% C = 20%
Most DNA occurs in nature as a right handed double helical molecule known as
therefore, % A + % T must total 80%
Watson Crick DNA or B DNA. The hydrophilic sugar phosphate backbone of
each strand is on the outside of the double helix. The hydrogen bonded base pairs
40% A and 40% T
are stacked in the center of the molecule. There are about 10 base pairs per
complete turn of the helix. A rare left handed double helical form of DNA that Ans: 40% T
occurs in G C–rich sequences is known as Z DNA. The biologic function of
Z DNA is unknown, but may be related to gene regulation.
AT
AT
CG
GC
BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
AT
TA Daunorubicin and doxorubicin are antitumor
GC
drugs that are used in the treatment of
TA
leukemias. They exert their effects by
Major
TA Groove intercalating between the bases of DNA,
GC Provide binding sites thereby interfering with the activity of
for regulatory proteins
CG topoisomerase II and preventing proper
AT
replication of the DNA.
Minor
GC Groove
Other drugs, such as cisplatin, which is used
GC
in the treatment of bladder and lung tumors,
AT
TA bind tightly to the DNA, causing structural
distortion and malfunction.
AT
AT
Figure I 1Fi8g.ureTheI 1B7.DBNADNADoDuobuleble HHeleilxix
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Denaturation and Renaturation of DNA
Double helical DNA can be denatured by conditions that disrupt hydrogen
Double stranded DNA bonding and base stacking, resulting in the “melting” of the double helix into two
single strands that separate from each other. No covalent bonds are broken in this
MedicalGenetics
Denaturation process. Heat, alkaline pH, and chemicals such as formamide and urea are
(heat) commonly used to denature DNA.
Denatured single stranded DNA can be renatured (annealed) if the denaturing
condition is slowly removed. For example, if a solution containing heat denatured
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
DNA is slowly cooled, the two complementary strands can become base paired
again (Figure I 1 8).
Single stranded DNA
Such renaturation or annealing of complementary DNA strands is an important
Renaturation step in probing a Southern blot and in performing the polymerase chain reaction
(cooling) (reviewed in Chapter 7). In these techniques, a well characterized probe DNA is
added to a mixture of target DNA molecules. The mixed sample is denatured and
then renatured. When probe DNA binds to target DNA sequences of sufficient
complementarity, the process is called hybridization.
Double stranded DNA
Recall Question
FiguFriegure II118. 9D.enaDtuernaatitounration and
and RReennaattuurraattiioonn of DNoAf DNA Methotrexate affects which portion of the cell cycle?
A. G1 phase
B. G2 phase
C. M phase
D. S phase
Answer: D
ORGANIzATION OF DNA
Large DNA molecules must be packaged in such a way that they can fit inside the
cell and still be functional.
Supercoiling
Mitochondrial DNA and the DNA of most prokaryotes are closed circular
structures. These molecules may exist as relaxed circles or as supercoiled structures
in which the helix is twisted around itself in 3 dimensional space. Supercoiling
results from strain on the molecule caused by under or overwinding the double
helix:
• Negatively supercoiled DNA is formed if the DNA is wound more loosely
than in Watson Crick DNA. This form is required for most biologic
reactions.
• Positively supercoiled DNA is formed if the DNA is wound more tightly
than in Watson Crick DNA.
1
CHAPTER 1 | NUCLEIC ACID STRUCTURE AND ORGANIzATION
• Topoisomerases are enzymes that can change the amount of supercoiling
HY HY
in DNA molecules. They make transient breaks in DNA strands by
alternately breaking and resealing the sugar phosphate backbone. FoMrY MY
example, in Escherichia coli, DNA gyrase (DNA topoisomerase II) can
introduce negative supercoiling into DNA. LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Nucleosomes and Chromatin
MEDIUM YIELD MEDIUM YIELD
Sensitive
+H1 Without H1 LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
to nuclease
10 nm
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
30 nm
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
H2A H3
H2B
H2B
H4 H3 Expanded view of
H4
a nucleosome
H1
Expanded view H2A
Figure I1 9. Nucleosome and Nucleofilament
Figure I 1 10. Nucleosome and Nucleofilament
Structure in Eukaryotic DNA
Structure in Eukaryotic DNA
Nuclear DNA in eukaryotes is found in chromatin associated with histones and
nonhistone proteins. The basic packaging unit of chromatin is the nucleosome.
• Histones are rich in lysine and arginine, which confer a positive charge on
the proteins.
• Two copies each of histones H2A, H2B, H3, and H4 aggregate to form the
histone octamer.
• DNA is wound around the outside of this octamer to form a nucleosome
(a series of nucleosomes is sometimes called “beads on a string” but is
more properly referred to as a 10nm chromatin fiber).
• Histone H1 is associated with the linker DNA found between nucleosomes
to help package them into a solenoid like structure, which is a thick
30 nm fiber.
• Further condensation occurs to eventually form the chromosome. Each
eukaryotic chromosome in G0 or G1 contains one linear molecule of
double stranded DNA.
Cells in interphase contain 2 types of chromatin: euchromatin (more opened and
available for gene expression) and heterochromatin (much more highly condensed
and associated with areas of the chromosomes that are not expressed).
1
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
More active Less active
MedicalGenetics
BehavioralScience/SocialSciencesDNA double helix 10 nm chromatin 30 nm chromatin 30 nm fiber forms loops attached Higher order
(nucleosomes) (nucleofilament) to scaffolding proteins packaging
Euchromatin Heterochromatin
Figure I 1 10. DNA Packaging in Eukaryotic Cell
Figure I 1 11. DNA Packaging in Eukaryotic Cell
Euchromatin generally corresponds to the nucleosomes (10 nm fibers) loosely
associated with each other (looped 30 nm fibers). Heterochromatin is more highly
condensed, producing interphase heterochromatin as well as chromatin character
istic of mitotic chromosomes. The figure below shows an electron micrograph of
an interphase nucleus containing euchromatin, heterochromatin, and a nucleolus.
The nucleolus is a nuclear region specialized for ribosome assembly (discussed in
Chapter 3).
Euchromatin
Heterochromatin
Nucleolus
Figure FIigu1re 12.I 1A1n1. IAnnterpIhnatesrephase NNuculceluesus
During mitosis, all the DNA is highly condensed to allow separation of the
sister chromatids. This is the only time in the cell cycle when the chromosome
structure is visible. Chromosome abnormalities may be assessed on mitotic
chromosomes by karyotype analysis (metaphase chromosomes) and by
banding techniques (prophase or prometaphase), which identify aneuploidy,
translocations, deletions, inversions, and duplications.
1
CHAPTER 1 | NUCLEIC ACID STRUCTURE AND ORGANIzATION
Review Questions
Select the ONE best answer.
1. A double stranded RNA genome isolated from a virus in the stool of a child
with gastroenteritis was found to contain 15% uracil. What is the percent
age of guanine in this genome?
A. 15
B. 25
C. 35
D. 75
E. 85
2. What is the structure indicated below?
NH2
N
N
N N
5 ́ CH2OH O
1 ́
4 ́
3 ́ 2 ́
OH OH
A. Purine nucleotide
B. Purine
C. Pyrimidine nucleoside
D. Purine nucleoside
E. Deoxyadenosine
3. Endonuclease activation and chromatin fragmentation are characteristic
features of eukaryotic cell death by apoptosis. Which of the following chro
mosome structures would most likely be degraded first in an apoptotic cell?
A. Barr body
B. 10 nm fiber
C. 30 nm fiber
D. Centromere
E. Heterochromatin
1
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
4. A medical student working in a molecular biology laboratory is asked by
her mentor to determine the base composition of an unlabeled nucleic acid
sample left behind by a former research technologist. The results of her
analysis show 10% adenine, 40% cytosine, 30% thymine and 20% guanine.
MedicalGenetics What is the most likely source of the nucleic acid in this sample?
A. Bacterial chromosome
B. Bacterial plasmid
C. Mitochondrial chromosome
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
D. Nuclear chromosome
E. Viral genome
1
CHAPTER 1 | NUCLEIC ACID STRUCTURE AND ORGANIzATION
Answers
1. Answer: C.
U = A = 15%.
Since A + G = 50%, G = 35%.
Alternatively, U = A = 15%, then U + A = 30%
C + G = 70%, and
G = 35%.
2. Answer: D. A nucleoside consists of a base and a sugar. The figure shows
the nucleoside adenosine, which is the base adenine attached to ribose.
3. Answer: B. The more “opened” the DNA, the more sensitive it is to enzyme
attack. The 10 nm fiber, without the H1, is the most open structure listed.
The endonuclease would attack the region of unprotected DNA between
the nucleosomes.
4. Answer: E. A base compositional analysis that deviates from Chargaff’s
rules (%A = %T, %C = %G) is indicative of single stranded, not double
stranded, nucleic acid molecule. All options listed except E are examples of
circular (choices A, B and C) or linear (choice D) DNA double helices.
Only a few viruses (e.g. parvovirus) have single stranded DNA.
1

2#
DNA Replication and Repair
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Explain how DNA and RNA synthesis differ
❏ Know key steps in DNA replication
❏ Know major kinds of DNA repair
DNA REPLICATION
Genetic information is transmitted from parent to progeny by replication of
parental DNA, a process in which 2 daughter DNA molecules are produced that
are each identical to the parental DNA molecule. During DNA replication, the
2 complementary strands of parental DNA are pulled apart. Each parental strand
is then used as a template for the synthesis of a new complementary strand
(semiconservative replication). During cell division, each daughter cell receives
one of the 2 identical DNA molecules.
1
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Replication of Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Chromosomes
The process of DNA replication in prokaryotes and eukaryotes is compared
below.
MedicalGenetics
Prokaryotes Eukaryotes
Origin of replication Multiple origins of replication
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Centromere
Sister chromatids are
separated during mitosis
Figure I 2 1. DNA Replication by a
SemiFigure ConIser2vati1v.e,DNA ReplicatioBnidirectionably a Semi MCoencshearnviastmive,
Bidirectional Mechanism
NOTE
• Polymerases are enzymes that The bacterial chromosome is a closed, double stranded circular DNA molecule
synthesize nucleic acids by forming having a single origin of replication. Separation of the 2 parental strands of DNA
phosphodiester (PDE) bonds. creates 2 replication forks that move away from each other in opposite directions
around the circle. Replication is, thus, a bidirectional process. The 2 replication
• Nucleases are enzymes that hydrolyze forks eventually meet, resulting in the production of 2 identical circular molecules
PDE bonds. of DNA.
– Exonucleases remove nucleotides Each eukaryotic chromosome contains one linear molecule of dsDNA having
from the 5′ or the 3′ end of a nucleic multiple origins of replication. Bidirectional replication occurs by means of a pair
acid. of replication forks produced at each origin. Completion of the process results in
the production of 2 identical linear molecules of dsDNA (sister chromatids). DNA
– Endonucleases cut within the replication occurs in the nucleus during the S phase of the eukaryotic cell cycle.
nucleic acid and release nucleic acid The 2 identical sister chromatids are separated from each other when the cell
divides during mitosis.
fragments.
1
CHAPTER 2 | DNA REPLICATION AND REPAIR
The structure of a representative eukaryotic chromosome during the cell cycle is
shown below.
Panel A
Cell
division
M
G2 G1
S
Centromere
2 ds DNA ds DNA
(sister chromatids)
Panel B
3
p 2
1
1
2
q
3
4
Drawing of a Drawing of a Photograph of a stained replicated
replicated stained replicated chromosome. The individual
chromosome chromosome chromatids and centromere are
(metaphase) difficult to visualize in the photograph
Figure I F2igur2e. PIan2el 2. PanAe:l EAu:kaEryuoktaicryotic ChrCohmroomsoomsoeme Replication ReplicDatuiorinng S PhaseDurinPganel BS: Phase
Panel B: Different DifferenRtepresRenetparteiosnenstations of aofRepalicatRedeplicatedEukaryotic EukCahrryoomtiocsome Chromosome
1
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
COMPARISON OF DNA AND RNA SYNTHESIS
The overall process of DNA replication requires the synthesis of both DNA and
RNA. These 2 types of nucleic acids are synthesized by DNA polymerases and
RNA polymerases, respectively.
MedicalGenetics
DNA RNA
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Polymerase Polymerase
DNA Template DNA Template
3 ́ C A T G A C T A G C C G A A C T C T G G A 5 ́ 3 ́ C A T G A C T A G C C G A A C T C T G G A 5 ́
5 ́ A C U G 3 ́
Primer required for Primer not required for
DNA synthesis (5 ́→3 ́) RNA synthesis (5 ́→3 ́)
RNA
using dNTP substrates using NTP substrates
primer
3 ́ C A T G A C T A G C C G A A C T C T G G A 5 ́ 3 ́ C A T G A C T A G C C G A A C T C T G G A 5 ́
5 ́ A C U G A T C G G T 3 ́ 5 ́ A U C G G U 3 ́
Mispaired deoxynucleotide Mispaired nucleotide
removed (3 ́→5 ́ exonuclease) not removed
dTMP
3 ́ C A T G A C T A G C C G A A C T C T G G A 5 ́ 3 ́ C A T G A C T A G C C G A A C T C T G G A 5 ́
5́ A C U G A T C G G 3 ́ 5 ́ A U C G G U 3 ́
High fidelity Low fidelity
DNA synthesis RNA synthesis
3 ́ C A T G A C T A G C C G A A C T C T G G A 5 ́ 3 ́ C A T G A C T A G C C G A A C T C T G G A 5 ́
5 ́ A C U G A T C G G C T T G A G A C 3 ́ 5 ́ A U C G G U U U G A G A C 3 ́
Figure FiIgur2e 3.I P2oly3m.erPaosleymerase EEnnzzyymmeess SynthesSizyenthesizeDNA and DRNNAA and RNA
Table I 2 1. Comparison of DNA and RNA Polymerases
DNA Polymerase RNA Polymerase
Nucleic acid synthesized (5′→3′) DNA RNA
Required template (copied 3′→5′) DNA* DNA*
Required substrates dATP, dGTP, dCTP, dTTP ATP, GTP, CTP, UTP
Required primer RNA (or DNA) None
Proofreading activity (3′→5′ exonuclease) Yes No
*Certain DNA and RNA polymerases require RNA templates. These enzymes are most commonly associated
with viruses.
2
CHAPTER 2 | DNA REPLICATION AND REPAIR
Similarities between DNA and RNA synthesis include:
• The newly synthesized strand is made in the 5′→3′ direction.
• The template strand is scanned in the 3′→5′ direction.
• The newly synthesized strand is complementary and antiparallel to the
template strand.
• Each new nucleotide is added when the 3′ hydroxyl group of the growing
strand reacts with a nucleoside triphosphate, which is base paired with the
template strand. Pyrophosphate (PPi, the last two phosphates) is released
during this reaction.
Differences include:
• The substrates for DNA synthesis are the dNTPs, whereas the substrates
for RNA synthesis are the NTPs.
• DNA contains thymine, whereas RNA contains uracil.
• DNA polymerases require a primer, whereas RNA polymerases do not.
That is, DNA polymerases cannot initiate strand synthesis, whereas RNA
polymerases can.
• DNA polymerases can correct mistakes (“proofreading”), whereas RNA
polymerases cannot. DNA polymerases have 3′ → 5′ exonuclease activity
for proofreading.
STEPS OF DNA REPLICATION
The molecular mechanism of DNA replication is shown below. The sequence of
events is as follows:
1. The base sequence at the origin of replication is recognized.
2. Helicase breaks the hydrogen bonds holding the base pairs together. This allows
the two parental strands of DNA to begin unwinding and forms 2 replication
forks.
3. Single stranded DNA binding protein (SSB) binds to the single stranded por
tion of each DNA strand, preventing them from reassociating and protecting
them from degradation by nucleases.
4. Primase synthesizes a short (about 10 nucleotides) RNA primer in the 5′→3′
direction, beginning at the origin on each parental strand. The parental strand
is used as a template for this process. RNA primers are required because DNA
polymerases are unable to initiate synthesis of DNA, and can only extend a
strand from the 3′ end of a preformed “primer.”
5. DNA polymerase III begins synthesizing DNA in the 5′→3′ direction,
beginning at the 3′ end of each RNA primer. The newly synthesized strand is
complementary and antiparallel to the parental strand used as a template. This
strand can be made continuously in one long piece and is known as the “lead
ing strand.”
• The “lagging strand” is synthesized discontinuously as a series of small
fragments (about 1,000 nucleotides long) known as Okazaki fragments.
Each Okazaki fragment is initiated by the synthesis of an RNA primer by
primase, and then completed by the synthesis of DNA using DNA poly
merase III. Each fragment is made in the 5′→3′ direction.
2
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
• There is a leading and a lagging strand for each of the two replication
forks on the chromosome.
6. RNA primers are removed by RNAase H in eukaryotes and an uncharacterized
DNA polymerase fills in the gap with DNA. In prokaryotes DNA polymerase I
MedicalGenetics
both removes the primer (5’ exonuclease) and synthesizes new DNA, begin
ning at the 3′ end of the neighboring Okazaki fragment.
7. Both eukaryotic and prokaryotic DNA polymerases have the ability to “proof
read” their work by means of a 3′→5′ exonuclease activity. If DNA polymerase
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences makes a mistake during DNA synthesis, the resulting unpaired base at the 3′
end of the growing strand is removed before synthesis continues.
8. DNA ligase seals the “nicks” between Okazaki fragments, converting them to a
continuous strand of DNA.
9. DNA gyrase (DNA topoisomerase II) provides a “swivel” in front of each rep
lication fork. As helicase unwinds the DNA at the replication forks, the DNA
ahead of it becomes overwound and positive supercoils form. DNA gyrase
inserts negative supercoils by nicking both strands of DNA, passing the DNA
strands through the nick, and then resealing both strands. Quinolones are a
family of drugs that block the action of topoisomerases. Nalidixic acid kills
bacteria by inhibiting DNA gyrase. Inhibitors of eukaryotic topoisomerase II
(etoposide, teniposide) are becoming useful as anticancer agents.
The mechanism of replication in eukaryotes is believed to be very similar to this.
However, the details have not yet been completely worked out. The steps and
proteins involved in DNA replication in prokaryotes are compared with those used
in eukaryotes in Table I 2 2.
Eukaryotic DNA Polymerases
• DNA polymerases α and δ work together to synthesize both the leading
and lagging strands.
• DNA polymerase γ replicates mitochondrial DNA. HY
• DNA polymerases β and ε are thought to participate primarily in DMNAY
repair. DNA polymerase ε may substitute for DNA polymerase δ in certain
cases. LY
High Yield H
NOTE Telomerase
Telomerase Telomeres are repetitive sequences at the ends of linear DNA mMoEleDcuIUleMs YinIELD ME
eukaryotic chromosomes. With each round of replication in most normal cells, the
• Completes the replication of the telomeres are shortened because DNA polymerase cannot complete LsOynWthesisYIELD of
telomere sequences at both ends of a the 5′ end of each strand. This contributes to the aging of cells, because eventually
eukaryotic chromosome the telomeres become so short that the chromosomes cannot function properly
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
and the cells die.
• Present in embryonic cells, fetal cells,
REINFORCEMENT RE
and certain adult stem cells; not Telomerase is an enzyme in eukaryotes used to maintain the telomeres. It contains
present in adult somatic cells a short RNA template complementary to the DNA telomere sequence, as well as
telomerase reverse transcriptase activity (hTRT). Telomerase is thus able to replace
• Inappropriately present in many telomere sequences that would otherwise be lost during replication. Normally
cancer cells, contributing to their telomerase activity is present only in embryonic cells, germ (reproductive) cells,
unlimited replication and stem cells, but not in somatic cells.
2
CHAPTER 2 | DNA REPLICATION AND REPAIR
Cancer cells often have relatively high levels of telomerase, preventing the BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
telomeres from becoming shortened and contributing to the immortality of
Quinolones and fluoroquinolones inhibit DNA
malignant cells.
gyrase (prokaryotic topoisomerase II),
preventing DNA replication and transcription.
Table I 2 2. Steps and Proteins Involved in DNA Replication
These drugs, which are most active against
Eukaryotic Cells
aerobic gram negative bacteria, include:
Step in Replication Prokaryotic Cells (Nuclei)
• Levofloxacin
Origin of replication (ori) One ori site per Multiple ori sites per
chromosome chromosome
• Ciprofloxacin
Unwinding of DNA double Helicase Helicase
• Moxifloxacin
helix
Resistance to the drugs has developed over
Stabilization of unwound Single stranded Single stranded
time; current uses include treatment of
template strands DNA binding DNA binding protein
protein (SSB) (SSB) gonorrhea and upper and lower urinary tract
infections in both sexes.
Synthesis of RNA primers Primase Primase
Synthesis of DNA DNA polymerase DNA polymerases α +
Leading strand III DNA poly δ DNA polymerases α
Lagging strand merase III + δ BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
(Okazaki fragments)
One chemotherapeutic treatment of HIV is
Removal of RNA primers DNA polymerase I RNAase H the use of AZT (3′ azido 2′,3′
(5′→3′ exonucle (5′→3′ exonuclease) dideoxythymidine) or structurally related
ase)
compounds. Once AZT enters cells, it can be
Replacement of RNA with DNA polymerase I DNA polymerase δ converted to the triphosphate derivative and
DNA
used as a substrate for the viral reverse
Joining of Okazaki DNA ligase DNA ligase transcriptase in synthesizing DNA from its
fragments RNA genome.
Removal of positive DNA topoisomer DNA topoisomerase II The replacement of an azide instead of a
supercoils ahead of ase II (DNA HY HY
normal hydroxyl group at the 3′ position of
advancing replication forks gyrase)
MY the deoxyribose prevenMtsY further replication
Synthesis of telomeres Not required Telomerase by effectively causing chain termination.
LY LY
Although it is a DNA polymerase, reverse
transcriptase lacks proofreading activity.
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Reverse Transcriptase
Reverse transcriptase is an RNA dependent DNA polymerase MthEatDIUMrequires YIELDan MEDIUM YIELD
RNA template to direct the synthesis of new DNA. Retroviruses, most notably
HIV, use this enzyme to replicate their RNA genomes. DNA synthesis LOWby rYevIeErLseD LOW YIELD
transcriptase in retroviruses can be inhibited by AZT, ddC, and ddI.
Eukaryotic cells also contain reverse transcriptase activity: FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
• Associated with telomerase (hTRT)
• Encoded by retrotransposons (residual viral genomes permanently
maintained in human DNA) that play a role in amplifying certain repeti
tive sequences in DNA (see Chapter 7)
2
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
5 ́ 3 ́
Leading Strand Synthesis (Continuous)
3 ́ 5 ́ 1. Primase synthesizes the primer ( ) 5 ́ to 3 ́.
Helicase
MedicalGenetics 2. DNA polymerases α and δ extend the primer, moving
Origin into the replication fork (Leading strand synthesis).
3. Helicase ( ) continues to unwind the DNA.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Lagging Strand Synthesis (Discontinuous)
5 ́ 3 ́
1. Primase synthesizes the primer ( ) 5 ́ to 3 ́.
3 ́ 5 ́ 2. DNA polymerases α and δ extend the primer, moving
away from the replication fork (Lagging strand synthesis).
3. Synthesis stops when DNA polymerase encounters
the primer of the leading strand on the other side
of the diagram, or the primer of the previous (Okazaki)
fragment.
4. As helicase opens more of the replication fork, a
third Okazaki fragment will be added.
RNAase H (5 ́ exoribonuclease activity) digests
the RNA primer from fragment 1. In the
5 ́ 3 ́ eukaryotic cell, DNA polymerase extends the
next fragment (2), to fill in the gap.
5 ́
3 ́
In prokaryotic cells DNA polymerase 1 has both
the 5 ́ exonuclease activity to remove primers, and
the DNA polymerase activity to extend the next
fragment (2) to fill in the gap.
In both types of cells DNA ligase connects
fragments 1 and 2 by making a phosphodiester
bond.
5 ́ 3 ́
3 ́ 5 ́
+
This whole process repeats to remove all RNA
5 ́ 3 ́
primers from both the leading and lagging strands.
3 ́ 5 ́
Figure I 2 4. DNA Replication
Figure I 2 4. DNA Replication
Recall Question
Which of the following enzymes is the target of fluoroquinolones in
replication of DNA strands?
A. DNA gyrase
B. DNA helicase
C. DNA ligase
D. DNA polymerase
Answer: A
2
CHAPTER 2 | DNA REPLICATION AND REPAIR
DNA REPAIR BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY
The structure of DNA can be damaged in a number of ways through exposure to DNA repair may not occur properly when
chemicals or radiation. Incorrect bases can also be incorporated during replica certain tumor suppressor genes have been
tion. Multiple repair systems have evolved, allowing cells to maintain the sequence inactivated through mutation or deletion:
stability of their genomes. If cells are allowed to replicate their DNA using a
damaged template, there is a high risk of introducing stable mutations into the • The p53 gene encodes a protein that
new DNA. Thus any defect in DNA repair carries an increased risk of cancer. Most prevents a cell with damaged DNA
DNA repair occurs in the G1 phase of the eukaryotic cell cycle. Mismatch repair from entering the S phase. Inactivation
occurs in the G2 phase to correct replication errors.
or deletion associated with Li
Fraumeni syndrome and many solid
Table I 2 3. DNA Repair
tumors.
Recognition/ Repair
• ATM gene encodes a kinase essential
Damage Cause Excision Enzyme Enzymes
for p53 activity. ATM is inactivated in
Thymine UV radiation Excision endonuclease DNA polymerase
ataxia telangiectasia, characterized by
dimers (G1) (deficient in xeroderma
DNA ligase
hypersensitivity to x rays and
pigmentosum)
predisposition to lymphomas. BRCA 1
Mis DNA replication A mutation on one of DNA polymerase
(breast, prostate, and ovarian cancer)
matched errors two genes, hMSH2
DNA ligase
and BRCA 2 (breast cancer).
base or hMLH1, initiates
(G2 and S) defective repair of
• The retinoblastoma Rb gene was the
DNA mismatches,
first tumor suppressor gene cloned,
resulting in a condi
tion known as and is a negative regulator of the
hereditary nonpolypo cell cycle through its ability to bind
sis colorectal
the transcription factor E2F and
cancer—HNPCC.
repress transcription of genes
Cytosine Spontaneous/ Uracil glycosylase AP DNA polymerase required for S phase.
HY HY
deamination heat endonuclease
DNA ligase
G1
MY MY
LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Repair of Thymine Dimers
Ultraviolet light induces the formation of dimers between adjacentMEDIUMthyminesYIELD in MEDIUM YIELD
DNA (also occasionally between other adjacent pyrimidines). The formation of
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
thymine dimers interferes with DNA replication and normal gene expression.
Thymine dimers are eliminated from DNA by a nucleotide excision repair
mechanism.
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
Steps in nucleotide excision repair:
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
• An excision endonuclease (excinuclease) makes nicks in the phosphodies
ter backbone of the damaged strand on both sides of the thymine dimer
and removes the defective oligonucleotide.
• DNA polymerase fills in the gap by synthesizing DNA in the 5′→3′
direction, using the undamaged strand as a template.
• DNA ligase seals the nick in the repaired strand.
2
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Base excision repair: cytosine deamination
Cytosine deamination (loss of an amino group from cytosine) converts cytosine to
uracil. The uracil is recognized and removed (base excision) by a uracil glycosylase
enzyme.
MedicalGenetics
• Subsequently this area is recognized by an AP endonuclease that removes
the damaged sequence from the DNA
• DNA polymerase fills in the gap
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
• DNA ligase seals the nick in the repaired strand
A summary of important genes involved in maintaining DNA fidelity and where
they function in the cell cycle is shown below.
Mismatch M
repair
• MSH2
• MLH1 G2 G1 G0
Thymine dimer
(bulky lesion) repair
S • XP
• Nucleotide excision
repair (cytosine
DNA polymerase deamination)
proofreads during
DNA synthesis Genes controlling
entry into S phase
• Rb
• p53 HY
MY
Figure I 2 6. Important Genes Associated with
Figure I 2 5. Important Genes Associated with Maintaining Fidelity
Maintaining Fidelity of Replicating DNA
of Replicating DNA LY
High Yield H
Diseases Associated with DNA Repair
Inherited mutations that result in defective DNA repair mechanismsMEDIUM are YaIEssLoDciated ME
with a predisposition to the development of cancer.
LOW YIELD
Xeroderma pigmentosum is an autosomal recessive disorder, characterized by
extreme sensitivity to sunlight, skin freckling and ulcerations, and skin cancer. The
most common deficiency occurs in the excinuclease enzyme. FUNDAMENTALS FUN
REINFORCEMENT RE
Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer results from a deficiency in the ability
to repair mismatched base pairs in DNA that are accidentally introduced during
replication.
2
CHAPTER 2 | DNA REPLICATION AND REPAIR
XERODERMA PIGMENTOSUM
Xeroderma pigmentosum is an autosomal recessive disorder (incidence
1/250,000) characterized by extreme sensitivity to sunlight, skin freckling,
ulcerations, and skin cancer. Carcinomas and melanomas appear early in life,
and most patients die of cancer. The most common deficiency occurs in the
excision endonuclease.
A 6 year old child was brought to the clinic because his parents were
concerned with excessive lesions and blistering in the facial and neck area.
The parents noted that the lesions did not go away with typical ointments
and creams and often became worse when the child was exposed to
sunlight. The physician noted excessive freckling throughout the child’s
body, as well as slight stature and poor muscle tone.
Xeroderma pigmentosum can be diagnosed by measurement of the relevant
enzyme excision endonuclease in white cells of blood. Patients with the disease
should avoid exposure to any source of UV light.
Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (Lynch syndrome)
Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) results from a mutation in
one of the genes (usually hMLH1 or hMSH2) encoding enzymes that carry out
DNA mismatch repair. These enzymes detect and remove errors introduced into NOTE
the DNA during replication. In families with HNPCC, individuals may inherit one
Microsatellites (also known as short tandem
nonfunctional, deleted copy of the hMLH1 gene or one nonfunctional, deleted
repeats) are di , tri , and tetranucleotide
copy of the hMSH2 gene. After birth, a somatic mutation in the other copy may
repeats dispersed throughout the DNA,
occur, causing loss of the mismatch repair function. This causes chromosomes to
retain errors (mutations) in many other loci, some of which may contribute to usually (but not exclusively) in noncoding
cancer progression. This is manifested in intestinal cells because they are constant regions.
ly undergoing cell division.
For example, TGTGTGTG may occur at a
One prominent type of error that accompanies DNA replication is microsatellite particular locus. If cells lack mismatch
instability. In a patient with HNPCC, cells from the resected tumor show micro
repair, the replicated DNA will vary in the
satellite instability, whereas normal cells from the individual (which still retain
number of repeats at that locus, e.g.,
mismatch repair) do not show microsatellite instability. Along with information
TGTGTGTGTGTG or TGTGTG. This variation is
from a family pedigree and histologic analysis, microsatellite instability may be
used as a diagnostic tool. microsatellite instability.
2
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Review Questions
Select the ONE best answer.
1. It is now believed that a substantial proportion of the single nucleotide sub
MedicalGenetics
stitutions causing human genetic disease are due to misincorporation of
bases during DNA replication. Which proofreading activity is critical in
determining the accuracy of nuclear DNA replication and thus the base
substitution mutation rate in human chromosomes?
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
A. 3′ to 5′ polymerase activity of DNA polymerase δ
B. 3′ to 5′ exonuclease activity of DNA polymerase γ
C. Primase activity of DNA polymerase α
D. 5′ to 3′ polymerase activity of DNA polymerase III
E. 3′ to 5′ exonuclease activity of DNA polymerase δ
2. The proliferation of cytotoxic T cells is markedly impaired upon infection
with a newly discovered human immunodeficiency virus, designated HIV
V. The defect has been traced to the expression of a viral encoded enzyme
that inactivates a host cell nuclear protein required for DNA replication.
Which protein is a potential substrate for the viral enzyme?
A. TATA box binding protein (TBP)
B. Cap binding protein (CBP)
C. Catabolite activator protein (CAP)
D. Acyl carrier protein (ACP)
E. Single strand binding protein (SBP)
3. The deficiency of an excision endonuclease may produce an exquisite sensi
tivity to ultraviolet radiation in xeroderma pigmentosum. Which of the fol
lowing functions would be absent in a patient deficient in this endonuclease?
A. Removal of introns
B. Removal of pyrimidine dimers
C. Protection against DNA viruses
D. Repair of mismatched bases during DNA replication
E. Repair of mismatched bases during transcription
4. The anti Pseudomonas action of norfloxacin is related to its ability to inhibit
chromosome duplication in rapidly dividing cells. Which of the following
enzymes participates in bacterial DNA replication and is directly inhibited
by this antibiotic?
A. DNA polymerase I
B. DNA polymerase II
C. Topoisomerase I
D. Topoisomerase II
E. DNA ligase
2
CHAPTER 2 | DNA REPLICATION AND REPAIR
5. Cytosine arabinoside (araC) is used as an effective chemotherapeutic agent
for cancer, although resistance to this drug may eventually develop. In cer
tain cases, resistance is related to an increase in the enzyme cytidine deami
nase in the tumor cells. This enzyme would inactivate araC to form
A. cytosine
B. cytidylic acid
C. thymidine arabinoside
D. uracil arabinoside
E. cytidine
6. Dyskeratosis congenital (DKC) is a genetically inherited disease in which
the proliferative capacity of stem cells is markedly impaired. The defect has
been traced to inadequate production of an enzyme needed for chromo
some duplication in the nuclei of rapidly dividing cells. Structural analysis
has shown that the active site of this protein contains a single stranded
RNA that is required for normal catalytic function. Which step in DNA
replication is most likely deficient in DKC patients?
A. Synthesis of centromeres
B. Synthesis of Okazaki fragments
C. Synthesis of RNA primers
D. Synthesis of telomeres
E. Removal of RNA primers
7. Single strand breaks in DNA comprise the single most frequent type of
DNA damage. These breaks are frequently due to reactive oxygen species
damaging the deoxyribose residues of the sugar phosphate backbone. This
type of break is repaired by a series of enzymes that reconstruct the sugar
and ultimately reform the phosphodiester bonds between nucleotides.
Which class of enzyme catalyzes the formation of the phosphodiester bond
in DNA repair?
A. DNA glycosylases
B. DNA helicases
C. DNA ligases
D. DNA phosphodiesterases
E. DNA polymerases
2
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Answers
1. Answer: E. The 3′ to 5′ exonuclease activity of DNA pol δ represents the
proofreading activity of an enzyme required for the replication of human
MedicalGenetics chromosomal DNA. DNA pol γ (mitochondrial) and DNA pol III (prokary
otic) do not participate in this process, short RNA primers are replaced
with DNA during replication, and new DNA strands are always synthesized
in the 5′ to 3′ direction.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences 2. Answer: E. TBP and CBP participate in eukaryotic gene transcription and
mRNA translation, respectively. CAP regulates the expression of prokary
otic lactose operons. ACP is involved in fatty acid synthesis.
3. Answer: B. Nucleotide excision repair of thymine (pyrimidine) dimers is
deficient in XP patients.
4. Answer: D. Norfloxacin inhibits DNA gyrase (topoisomerase II).
5. Answer: D. Deamination of cytosine would produce uracil.
6. Answer: D. The enzyme is described as an RNA dependent DNA poly
merase required for chromosome duplication in the nuclei of rapidly divid
ing cells. This enzyme is telomerase, a reverse transcriptase, that replicates
the ends (telomeres) of linear chromosomes.
None of the other options have reverse transcriptase activity.
7. Answer: C. All DNA repair systems use a ligase to seal breaks in the sugar
phosphate backbone of DNA. Although polymerase enzymes make phos
phodiester bonds during DNA synthesis, these enzymes do not ligate
strands of DNA.
3
3#
Transcription and RNA Processing
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Use knowledge of types of RNA
❏ Understand concepts of prokaryotic messenger RNA
❏ Understand concepts of eukaryotic messenger RNA
❏ Demonstrate understanding of alternative splicing of eukaryotic
primary pre mRNA transcripts
❏ Know key features of ribosomal RNA (rRNA)
❏ Know key features of transfer RNA (tRNA)
TRANSCRIPTION
The first stage in the expression of genetic information is transcription of the
information in the base sequence of a double stranded DNA molecule to form the
base sequence of a single stranded molecule of RNA. For any particular gene, only
one strand of the DNA molecule (the template strand) is copied by RNA poly
merase as it synthesizes RNA in the 5′ to 3′ direction. Because RNA polymerase
moves in the 3′ to 5′ direction along the template strand of DNA, the RNA product
is antiparallel and complementary to the template. RNA polymerase recognizes
start signals (promoters) and stop signals (terminators) for each of the thousands
of transcription units in the genome of an organism.
The figure below illustrates the arrangement and direction of transcription for
several genes on a DNA molecule.
Terminator Terminato
Promoter Promoter
Transcription
5 ́ 3 ́
Spacer Gene Spacer Gene Spacer Gene Spacer
DNA 1 DNA 2 DNA 3 DNA
3 ́ 5 ́
Transcription Transcription
Promoter
Terminator
Figure I 3 1. Transcription of Several Genes on a Chromosome
Figure I 3 1. Transcription of Several Genes on a Chromosome
31
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
TYPES OF RNA
RNA molecules play a variety of roles in the cell. The major types of RNA are:
• Ribosomal RNA (rRNA), which is the most abundant type of RNA in the
MedicalGenetics
cell. It is used as a structural component of the ribosome. Ribosomal RNA
associates with ribosomal proteins to form the complete, functional
ribosome.
• Transfer RNA (tRNA), which is the second most abundant type of RNA.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Its function is to carry amino acids to the ribosome, where they will be
linked together during protein synthesis.
• Messenger RNA (mRNA), which carries the information specifying the
amino acid sequence of a protein to the ribosome. Messenger RNA is the
only type of RNA that is translated. The mRNA population in a cell is
very heterogeneous in size and base sequence, as the cell has essentially a
different mRNA molecule for each of the thousands of different proteins
made by that cell.
• Heterogeneous nuclear RNA (hnRNA or pre mRNA), which is found only
in the nucleus of eukaryotic cells. It represents precursors of mRNA,
formed during its posttranscriptional processing.
• Small nuclear RNA (snRNA), which is also only found in the nucleus of
eukaryotes. One of its major functions is to participate in splicing
(removal of introns) mRNA.
• Ribozymes, which are RNA molecules with enzymatic activity. They are
found in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes.
RNA POLYMERASES
There is a single prokaryotic RNA polymerase that synthesizes all types of RNA in
the cell. The core polymerase responsible for making the RNA molecule has the
subunit structure α2ββ′. A protein factor called sigma (σ) is required for the
initiation of transcription at a promoter. Sigma factor is released immediately after
initiation of transcription. Termination of transcription sometimes requires a
protein called rho (ρ) factor. The prokaryotic RNA polymerase is inhibited by
rifampin. Actinomycin D binds to the DNA, preventing transcription.
There are 3 eukaryotic RNA polymerases, distinguished by the particular types of
RNA they produce.
• RNA polymerase I is located in the nucleolus and synthesizes 28S, 18S,
and 5.8S rRNAs.
• RNA polymerase II is located in the nucleoplasm and synthesizes hnRNA/
mRNA and some snRNA.
• RNA polymerase III is located in the nucleoplasm and synthesizes tRNA,
some snRNA, and 5S rRNA.
Transcription factors (such as TFIID for RNA polymerase II) help to initiate
transcription. The requirements for termination of transcription in eukaryotes are
not well understood. All transcription can be inhibited by actinomycin D. In
addition, RNA polymerase II is inhibited by α amanitin (a toxin from certain
mushrooms).
3
CHAPTER 3 | TRANSCRIPTION AND RNA PROCESSING
Table I 3 1. Comparison of RNA Polymerases
Prokaryotic Eukaryotic
Single RNA polymerase RNAP 1: rRNA (nucleolus) Except 5S rRNA
(α2 ββ′)
RNAP 2: hnRNA/mRNA and some snRNA
RNAP 3: tRNA, 5S rRNA
Requires sigma (σ) to No sigma, but transcription factors (TFIID)
initiate at a promoter bind before RNA polymerase
Sometimes requires No rho required
rho (ρ) to terminate
Inhibited by rifampin RNAP 2 inhibited by α amanitin (mushrooms)
Actinomycin D Actinomycin D
TRANSCRIPTION: IMPORTANT CONCEPTS
AND TERMINOLOGY
RNA is synthesized by a DNA dependent RNA polymerase (uses DNA as a
template for the synthesis of RNA). Important terminology used when discussing
transcription is illustrated below.
• RNA polymerase locates genes in DNA by searching for promoter regions.
The promoter is the binding site for RNA polymerase. Binding establishes
where transcription begins, which strand of DNA is used as the template,
and in which direction transcription proceeds. No primer is required.
• RNA polymerase moves along the template strand in the 3′ to 5′ direction
as it synthesizes the RNA product in the 5′ to 3′ direction using NTPs
(ATP, GTP, CTP, UTP) as substrates. RNA polymerase does not proofread
its work. The RNA product is complementary and antiparallel to the
template strand.
• The coding (antitemplate) strand is not used during transcription. It is
identical in sequence to the RNA molecule, except that RNA contains
uracil instead of the thymine found in DNA.
• By convention, the base sequence of a gene is given from the coding strand
(5′→3′).
• In the vicinity of a gene, a numbering system is used to identify the
location of important bases. The first base transcribed as RNA is defined
as the +1 base of that gene region.
– To the left (5′, or upstream) of this starting point for transcription,
bases are –1, –2, –3, etc.
– To the right (3′, or downstream) of this point, bases are +2, +3, etc.
• Transcription ends when RNA polymerase reaches a termination signal.
3
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Upstream Downstream
Transcription unit
Start
Terminator
MedicalGenetics site
-10 +1+10 Coding (antitemplate) strand
RNA polymerase
5 ́ 3 ́
Promoter transcribes DNA
3 ́ 5 ́
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences DNA Template strand template strand
RNA transcript is
RNA 5 ́ 3 ́
synthesized 5 ́ 3 ́
HY
Figure I 3Fig2u.re TranIsc3ript2io.nTranscription of DoNfADNA MY
LY
Flow of Genetic Information from
High Yield H
DNA to Protein
For the case of a gene coding for a protein, the relationship amonMgEDIUMthe seqYuIeEnLceDs ME
found in double stranded DNA, single stranded mRNA, and protein is illustrated
below. Messenger RNA is synthesized in the 5′ to 3′ direction. It is comLpOleWmentarYyIELD
and antiparallel to the template strand of DNA. The ribosome translates the
mRNA in the 5′ to 3′ direction, as it synthesizes the protein from the amino to the
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
carboxyl terminus.
REINFORCEMENT RE
Coding strand
DNA coding strand is
5 ́ A T GGGGC T CAGCGAC 3 ́
DNA identical to the mRNA
(except T for U)
DNA template strand
Transcription 3 ́ TACCCCGAGTCGCTG 5 ́
is complementary and
Template strand
antiparallel to the mRNA
mRNA 5 ́ A UGGGGCUCAGCGAC 3 ́ Direction of
transcription
Translation
Codons
Direction of
Protein NH2 Met Gly Leu Ser Asp COOH
translation
Figure I 3 3. Flow of Genetic Information from DNA to Protein
Figure I 3 3. Flow of Genetic Information from DNA to Protein
3
CHAPTER 3 | TRANSCRIPTION AND RNA PROCESSING
Review Questions
Select the ONE best answer.
1. During RNA synthesis, the DNA template sequence TAGC would be tran
scribed to produce which of the following sequences?
A. ATCG
B. GCTA
C. CGTA
D. AUCG
E. GCUA
The answer is E. RNA is antiparallel and complementary to the template strand.
Also remember that, by convention, all base sequences are written in the 5′ to 3′
direction regardless of the direction in which the sequence may actually be used
in the cell.
Approach:
• Cross out any option with a T (RNA has U).
• Look at the 5′ end of DNA (T in this case).
• What is the complement of this base? (A)
Examine the options given. A correct option will have the complement (A in this
example) at the 3′ end. Repeat the procedure for the 3′ end of the DNA. This will
usually leave only one or two options.
2. Transcription of the following sequence of the tryptophan operon occurs in
the direction indicated by the arrow. What would be the base sequence of
the mRNA produced?
3′ CGTCAGC 5′
Transcription → Which product?
5′...GCAGTCG...3′
A. 5′...GCAGUCG...3′
B. 5′...CGUGAGC...3′
C. 5′...GCUGACG...3′
D. 5′...CGUCAGC...3′
E. 5′...CGUGAGC...3′
The answer is A. Because all nucleic acids are synthesized in the 5′ to 3′ direc
tion, mRNA and the coding strand of DNA must each be oriented 5′ to 3′, i.e., in
the direction of transcription. This means that the bottom strand in this
example is the coding strand. The top strand is the template strand.
Approach:
• Cross out any option with a T.
• Identify the coding strand of DNA from the direction of transcription.
• Find the option with a sequence identical to the coding strand (remem
ber to substitute U for T, if necessary).
• Alternatively, if you prefer to find the complement of the template
strand, you will get the same answer.
3
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
PRODUCTION OF PROKARYOTIC MESSENGER RNA
The structure and expression of a typical prokaryotic gene coding for a protein are
illustrated in Figure I 3 4. The following events occur during the expression of this
gene:
MedicalGenetics
1. With the help of sigma factor, RNA polymerase recognizes and binds to the
promoter region. The bacterial promoter contains two “consensus” sequences,
called the Pribnow box (or TATA box) and the –35 sequence. The promoter
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences identifies the start site for transcription and orients the enzyme on the tem
plate strand. The RNA polymerase separates the two strands of DNA as it reads
the base sequence of the template strand.
2. Transcription begins at the +1 base pair. Sigma factor is released as soon as
transcription is initiated.
3. The core polymerase continues moving along the template strand in the 3′ to 5′
direction, synthesizing the mRNA in the 5′ to 3′ direction.
4. RNA polymerase eventually reaches a transcription termination signal, at
which point it will stop transcription and release the completed mRNA mol
ecule. There are two kinds of transcription terminators commonly found in
prokaryotic genes:
• Rho independent termination occurs when the newly formed RNA folds
back on itself to form a GC rich hairpin loop closely followed by 6–8 U
residues. These two structural features of the newly synthesized RNA
promote dissociation of the RNA from the DNA template. This is the type
of terminator shown in Figure I 3 4.
• Rho dependent termination requires participation of rho factor. This
protein binds to the newly formed RNA and moves toward the RNA
polymerase that has paused at a termination site. Rho then displaces RNA
polymerase from the 3′ end of the RNA.
5. Transcription and translation can occur simultaneously in bacteria. Because
there is no processing of prokaryotic mRNA (no introns), ribosomes can begin
translating the message even before transcription is complete. Ribosomes bind
to a sequence called the Shine Dalgarno sequence in the 5′ untranslated region
(UTR) of the message. Protein synthesis begins at an AUG codon at the begin
ning of the coding region and continues until the ribosome reaches a stop
codon at the end of the coding region.
6. The ribosome translates the message in the 5′ to 3′ direction, synthesizing the
protein from amino terminus to carboxyl terminus.
3
CHAPTER 3 | TRANSCRIPTION AND RNA PROCESSING
DNA Transcription
TATA
box
ATG TGA
–35 –10 Coding region
5 ́ 3 ́
3 ́ 5 ́
Promoter
5 ́ Untranslated 3 ́ Untranslated
region (UTR) region (UTR)
+1
Transcription
Transcription terminates
mRNA GC rich stem
AUG UGA and loop
Shine Dalgarno
Coding region
sequence
5 ́ UUUUUU 3 ́
5 ́ UTR 3 ́ UTR
Translation
H2N - Protein - COOH
Figure IF3igure4. EIxp3ress4io.nExpression ofofaaPProrokkaaryryootitcic ProteinProteinCoding CGodenineg Gene
The mRNA produced by the gene shown in the figure above is a monocistronic
message. That is, it is transcribed from a single gene and codes for only a single
protein. The word cistron is another name for a gene. Some bacterial operons (for
example, the lactose operon) produce polycistronic messages. In these cases,
related genes grouped together in the DNA are transcribed as one unit. The mRNA
in this case contains information from several genes and codes for several different
proteins.
Promoter 5 ́ UTR Gene 1 Gene 2 Gene 3 3 ́ UTR
AUG UAA AUG UGA AUG UAG
5 ́ UTR 3 ́ UTR
Polycistronic Gene 1 Gene 2 Gene 3
mRNA
Shine Dalgarno Shine Dalgarno Shine Dalgarno
Each gene is translated independently
H2N–Protein–COOH H2N–Protein–COOH H2N–Protein–COOH
12 3
Figure I 3 5. Polycistronic Gene Region Codes for Several Different Proteins
Figure I 3 5. Polycistronic Gene Region Codes for Several Different Proteins
3
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
PRODUCTION OF EUKARYOTIC MESSENGER RNA
In eukaryotes, most genes are composed of coding segments (exons) interrupted
by noncoding segments (introns). Both exons and introns are transcribed in the
nucleus. Introns are removed during processing of the RNA molecule in the
MedicalGenetics
nucleus. In eukaryotes, all mRNA is monocistronic. The mature mRNA is trans
lated in the cytoplasm. The structure and transcription of a typical eukaryotic gene
coding for a protein is illustrated in Figure I 3 6. Transcription of this gene occurs
as follows:
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
1. With the help of proteins called transcription factors, RNA polymerase II
recognizes and binds to the promoter region. The basal promoter region of
eukaryotic genes usually has two consensus sequences called the TATA box
(also called Hogness box) and the CAAT box.
2. RNA polymerase II separates the strands of the DNA over a short region to
initiate transcription and read the DNA sequence. The template strand is read
in the 3′ to 5′ direction as the RNA product (the primary transcript) is synthe
sized in the 5′ to 3′ direction. Both exons and introns are transcribed.
3. RNA polymerase II ends transcription when it reaches a termination signal.
These signals are not well understood in eukaryotes.
Poly A addition
DNA signal
ATG TAG
Promoter Exon 1 Exon 2
–70 –25 Intron
5 ́ 3 ́
3 ́ 5 ́
CAAT TATA
box box 5 ́ Untranslated 3 ́ Untranslated
region (UTR) region (UTR)
+1 Transcription
terminates
Transcription
Poly A addition
AUG UAG signal
Exon 1 Exon 2
Intron
Pre mRNA 5 ́ 3 ́
5 ́ UTR 3 ́ UTR
HY
MY
Figure FigureI 3 I63. 6A. AEuEkuakryaorytioctic TransTcrraipntsicorniption Unit Unit
LY
Processing of Eukaryotic
High Yield H
Pre Messenger RNA
The primary transcript must undergo extensive co and post traMnEscDriIpUtiMonal YIELD ME
processing inside the nucleus to form the mature mRNA molecule. These
processing steps include the following: LOW YIELD
1. A 7 methylguanosine cap is added to the 5′ end while the RNA molecule is
still being synthesized. The cap structure serves as a ribosome FUNDAbiMndEinNgTALS site and FUN
also helps to protect the mRNA chain from degradation.
REINFORCEMENT R
38
CHAPTER 3 | TRANSCRIPTION AND RNA PROCESSING
2. A poly A tail is attached to the 3′ end. In this process, an endonuclease cuts
the molecule on the 3′ side of the sequence AAUAAA (poly A addition signal),
then poly A polymerase adds the poly A tail (about 200 As) to the new 3′ end.
The poly A tail protects the message against rapid degradation and aids in its
transport to the cytoplasm. A few mRNAs (for example, histone mRNAs) have
no poly A tails.
Poly A addition
AUG UAG signal
Exon 1 Exon 2
Intron
Pre mRNA 5 ́ 3 ́
5 ́ UTR 3 ́ UTR
Capping and Poly A Poly A addition
AUG addition (nucleus) UAG signal
Exon 1 Exon 2
Cap
Intron
hnRNA Me
5 ́ AAAAAAAA 3 ́
Gppp
Poly A tail
5 ́ UTR 5 ́ Splice 3 ́ Splice 3 ́ UTR
donor acceptor
site site
Splicing by spliceosome (snRNA) (nucleus)
3 ́
Excised intron Poly A addition
(lariat) degraded signal
in nucleus
AUG Exon 1 UAG Exon 2
Cap
Me
mRNA 5 ́ AAAAAAAA 3 ́
Gppp
Poly A tail
5 ́ UTR 3 ́ UTR
Transport to cytoplasm
and translation
H2N–Protein–COOH
Figure I 3 7. ProceFsisgiunrge I 3 7. EPurkoacreysositnicg EukarPyroetic mRPNreA mRNA
3
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
NOTE 3. Introns are removed from hnRNA by splicing, accomplished by spliceosomes
(also known as an snRNP, or snurp), which are complexes of snRNA and
Mutations in splice sites can lead to
protein. The hnRNA molecule is cut at splice sites at the 5′ (donor) and 3′ (ac
abnormal proteins. For example, mutations
ceptor) ends of the intron. The intron is excised in the form of a lariat structure
MedicalGenettihcast interfere with proper splicing of and degraded. Neighboring exons are joined together to assemble the coding
β globin mRNA are responsible for some region of the mature mRNA.
cases of β thalassemia.
4. All of the intermediates in this processing pathway are collectively known as
hnRNA.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences 5. The mature mRNA molecule is transported to the cytoplasm, where it is trans
lated to form a protein.
ALTERNATIVE SPLICING OF EUKARYOTIC PRIMARY
PRE mRNA TRANSCRIPTS
For some genes, the primary transcript is spliced differently to produce two or
more variants of a protein from the same gene. This process is known as alterna
tive splicing. Variants of the muscle proteins tropomyosin and troponin T are
produced in this way. The synthesis of membrane bound immunoglobulins by
unstimulated B lymphocytes, as opposed to secreted immunoglobulins by
antigen stimulated B lymphocytes, also involves alternative splicing.
The primary transcripts from a large percentage of genes undergo alternative
splicing. This may occur within the same cell, or the primary transcript of a gene
may be alternatively spliced in different tissues, giving rise to tissue specific
protein products. By alternative splicing, an organism can make many more
different proteins than it has genes to encode. A current estimate of the number of
human proteins is at least 100,000, whereas the current estimate of human genes is
about only 20,000–25,000. Alternative splicing can be detected by Northern blot, a
technique discussed in Chapter 7.
NOTE Primary pre RNA transcript
These figures should not be memorized
AUG UAA
because they may change upon more
Intron 1 Intron 2 Intron 3
research. 5 ́ Exon 1 Exon 2 Exon 3 Exon 4 3 ́
Splicing Splicing
variation #1 variation #2
5 ́ Exon 1 Exon 2 Exon 4 3 ́ 5 ́ Exon 1 Exon 3 Exon 4 3 ́
mRNA #1 mRNA #2
Figure I 3 8. Alternative Splicing of Eukaryotic hnRNA (Pre mRNA)
to Produce Different Proteins
4
CHAPTER 3 | TRANSCRIPTION AND RNA PROCESSING
RIBOSOMAL RNA (rRNA) IS USED TO
CONSTRUCT RIBOSOMES
Eukaryotic ribosomal RNA is transcribed in the nucleolus by RNA polymerase I as
a single piece of 45S RNA, which is subsequently cleaved to yield 28S rRNA, 18S
rRNA, and 5.8S rRNA. RNA polymerase III transcribes the 5S rRNA unit from a
separate gene. The ribosomal subunits assemble in the nucleolus as the rRNA
pieces combine with ribosomal proteins. Eukaryotic ribosomal subunits are 60S
and 40S. They join during protein synthesis to form the whole 80S ribosome.
Prokaryotic Ribosome Eukaryotic Ribosome
BRIDGE TO MICROBIOLOGY
70S 80S
50S Shiga toxin (Shigella dysenteriae)
subunit 5S RNA 60S 5S RNA and Verotoxin, a Shiga like toxin
subunit 5.8S
(enterohemorrhagic E. coli), inactivate the
23S RNA 28S rRNA in the 60S subunit of the
28S RNA
eukaryotic ribosome. The A subunits of these
30S 16S RNA 40S 18S RNA toxins are RNA glycosylases that remove a
subunit subunit single adenine residue from the 28S rRNA.
This prevents aminoacyl tRNA binding to the
ribosome, halting protein synthesis.
Figure I 3 9. The I 3C9o.mpTohsietionComposition of oPfroPkraorkyaortyicotic andandEukaryEoutikcaryoticRibosomes RibosomesFigure
The large and small prokaryotic ribosomal subunits are 50S and 30S, respectively.
The complete prokaryotic ribosome is a 70S particle. (Note: The S values are
determined by behavior of the particles in an ultracentrifuge. They are a function
of both size and shape, and therefore the numbers are not additive.)
TRANSFER RNA (tRNA) CARRIES ACTIVATED AMINO ACIDS
FOR TRANSLATION
There are many different specific tRNAs. Each tRNA carries only one type of
activated amino acid for making proteins during translation. The genes encoding
these tRNAs in eukaryotic cells are transcribed by RNA polymerase III. The tRNAs
enter the cytoplasm where they combine with their appropriate amino acids.
Although all tRNAs have the same general shape shown in Figure I 3 10, small
structural features distinguish among them.
4
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
3 ́ end
A OH Activated amino
acid is attached
C
to 3 ́ OH.
MedicalGenetics C
5 ́ end A
P C A
G C
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
C G
G C
G C
G C
G C A A
C G G C C U
U
C G A
C A C G A G G
G U C G G
T ψ C
U C
G A G C U C U
G D G
G
A A
U G
C G
G C
G C
G C
Cm A
U A
C U
A Anticodon sequence (CAU)
pairs with codon in mRNA.
Figure I 3 10. Transfer RNA (tRNA)
Figure I 3 10. Transfer RNA (tRNA)
RNA Editing
RNA editing is a process by which some cells make discrete changes to specific
nucleotide sequences within a RNA molecule after its gene has been transcribed by
RNA polymerase. Posttranscription editing events may include insertion, deletion,
and base alterations of nucleotides (such as adenine deamination) within the
edited RNA molecule. RNA editing has been observed in some mRNA, rRNA, and
tRNA molecules in humans.
An important example is cytosine to uracil deamination in the apoprotein B gene.
Apoprotein B100 is expressed in the liver, and apoprotein B48 is expressed in the
intestines. In the intestines, the mRNA is edited from a CAA sequence to be UAA,
a stop codon, thus producing the shorter apoprotein B48 form.
4
CHAPTER 3 | TRANSCRIPTION AND RNA PROCESSING
Recall Question
Which eukaryotic RNA contains UTR?
A. mRNA
B. rRNA
C. tRNA
Answer: A
Table I 3 2. Important Points About Transcription and RNA Processing
Prokaryotic Eukaryotic
Gene regions May be polycistronic Always monocistronic
Genes are continuous coding regions Genes have exons and introns
Very little spacer (noncoding) DNA Large spacer (noncoding) DNA between
between genes genes
RNA polymerase Core enzyme: α2ββ′ RNA polymerase I: rRNA
RNA polymerase II: mRNA; snRNA
RNA polymerase III: tRNA, 5S RNA
Initiation of transcription Promoter (–10) TATAAT and (–35) Promoter (–25) TATA and (–70) CAAT
sequence
Transcription factors (TFIID) bind
Sigma initiation subunit required to promoter
recognize promoter
mRNA synthesis Template read 3′ to 5′; mRNA synthesized 5′ to 3′; gene sequence specified from
coding strand 5′ to 3′; transcription begins at +1 base
Termination of transcription Stem and loop + UUUUU Not well characterized
Stem and loop + rho factor
Relationship of RNA RNA is antiparallel and complementary to DNA template strand; RNA is identical
transcript to DNA (except U substitutes for T) to DNA coding strand
Posttranscriptional None In nucleus:
processing of hnRNA
5′ cap (7 MeG)
(pre mRNA)
3′ tail (poly A sequence)
Removal of introns from pre RNA
• Alternative splicing yields variants
of protein product
Ribosomes 70S (30S and 50S) 80S (40S and 60S)
rRNA and protein rRNA and protein
tRNA Cloverleaf secondary structure
• Acceptor arm (CCA) carries amino acid
• Anticodon arm; anticodon complementary and antiparallel to codon in mRNA
4
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Review Questions
Select the ONE best answer.
1. The base sequence of codons 57 58 in the cytochrome β5 reductase gene is
MedicalGenetics
CAGCGC. The mRNA produced upon transcription of this gene will con
tain which sequence?
A. GCGCTG
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences B. CUGCGC
C. GCGCUG
D. CAGCGC
E. GUCGCG
2. A gene encodes a protein with 150 amino acids. There is one intron of
1,000 bps, a 5′ untranslated region of 100 bp, and a 3′ untranslated region
of 200 bp. In the final processed mRNA, how many nucleotides lie from the
start AUG codon to the final termination codon?
A. 1,750
B. 750
C. 650
D. 450
E. 150
Items 3–5: Identify the nuclear location.
ED
A
C
B
3. Transcription of genes by RNA polymerase 1
4. Euchromatin
5. Polyadenylation of pre mRNA by poly A polymerase
4
CHAPTER 3 | TRANSCRIPTION AND RNA PROCESSING
Answers
1. Answer: D. Since the sequence in the stem represents the coding strand,
the mRNA sequence must be identical (except U for T). No T in the DNA
means no U in the mRNA.
2. Answer: D. Only the coding region remains to be calculated: 3 × 150 = 450.
3. Answer: B. rRNA genes are transcribed by this enzyme in the nucleolus.
4. Answer: A. Less condensed chromatin, lighter areas in the nucleus. Darker
areas are heterochromatin.
5. Answer: A. Polyadenylation of pre mRNA occurs in the nucleoplasm.
Generally associated with active gene expression in euchromatin.
4

The Genetic Code, Mutations,
4#
and Translation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Demonstrate understanding of the genetic code
❏ Solve problems concerning mutations
❏ Interpret scenarios about amino acid activation and codon translation
by tRNAs
❏ Demonstrate understanding of translation (protein synthesis)
❏ Explain information related to inhibitors of protein synthesis
❏ Interpret scenarios about protein folding and subunit assembly
❏ Answer questions about how translation occurs on the rough endoplasmic
reticulum
❏ Demonstrate understanding of co and posttranslational covalent
modifications
❏ Solve problems concerning posttranslational modifications of
collagen
TRANSLATION
The second stage in gene expression is translating the nucleotide sequence of a
messenger RNA molecule into the amino acid sequence of a protein. The
genetic code is defined as the relationship between the sequence of nucleotides
in DNA (or its RNA transcripts) and the sequence of amino acids in a protein.
Each amino acid is specified by one or more nucleotide triplets (codons) in
the DNA.
During translation, mRNA acts as a working copy of the gene in which the
codons for each amino acid in the protein have been transcribed from DNA to
mRNA. tRNAs serve as adapter molecules that couple the codons in mRNA with
the amino acids they each specify, thus aligning them in the appropriate sequence
before peptide bond formation. Translation takes place on ribosomes, complexes
of protein and rRNA that serve as the molecular machines coordinating the
interactions between mRNA, tRNA, the enzymes, and the protein factors required
for protein synthesis. Many proteins undergo posttranslational modifications as
they prepare to assume their ultimate roles in the cell.
4
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
THE GENETIC CODE
Most genetic code tables designate the codons for amino acids as mRNA sequenc
es. Important features of the genetic code include:
MedicalGenetics
• Each codon consists of 3 bases (triplet). There are 64 codons. They are all
written in the 5′ to 3′ direction.
• 61 codons code for amino acids. The other 3 (UAA, UGA, UAG) are stop
codons (or nonsense codons) that terminate translation.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
• There is one start codon (initiation codon), AUG, coding for methionine.
Protein synthesis begins with methionine (Met) in eukaryotes, and
formylmethionine (fMet) in prokaryotes.
• The code is unambiguous. Each codon specifies no more than one amino
acid.
• The code is degenerate. More than one codon can specify a single amino
acid. All amino acids, except Met and tryptophan (Trp), have more than
one codon.
• For those amino acids having more than one codon, the first 2 bases in the
codon are usually the same. The base in the third position often varies.
• The code is universal (the same in all organisms). Some minor exceptions
to this occur in mitochondria.
• The code is commaless (contiguous). There are no spacers or “commas”
between codons on an mRNA.
• Neighboring codons on a message are nonoverlapping.
First Third
Second Position
Position Position
(5 ́ End) U C A G (3 ́ End)
U
U U U U U U C } Phe U U C C U C } Ser U U A A U C } Tyr U U G G U C } Cys C
UUA UCA UAA UGA Stop A
} Leu } Stop
UUG UCG UAG UGG Trp G
U
CUU CCU CAU CGU
C CUC } Leu CCC } Pro CAC } His CGC } Arg C
CUA CCA CAA CGA A
CUG CCG CAG } Gln CGG G
AUU ACU AAU } AGU } U
A AUC } lle ACC } Thr AAC Asn AGC Ser C
A A U U A G Met A A C C A G A A A A A G } Lys A A G G A G } Arg A
G
U
GUU GCU GAU } Asp GGU
G G G U U C A } Val G G C C C A } Ala G G A A C A } Glu G G G G C A } Gly C A
GUG GCG GAG GGG
Figure I 4 1. The Genetic Code
Figure I 4 1. The Genetic Code
48
CHAPTER 4 | THE GENETIC CODE, MUTATIONS, AND TRANSLATION
MUTATIONS
A mutation is any permanent, heritable change in the DNA base sequence of an
organism. This altered DNA sequence can be reflected by changes in the base
sequence of mRNA, and, sometimes, by changes in the amino acid sequence of a
protein. Mutations can cause genetic diseases. They can also cause changes in
enzyme activity, nutritional requirements, antibiotic susceptibility, morphology,
antigenicity, and many other properties of cells.
A very common type of mutation is a single base alteration or point mutation.
• A transition is a point mutation that replaces a purine pyrimidine base
pair with a different purine pyrimidine base pair. For example, an A T
base pair becomes a G C base pair.
• A transversion is a point mutation that replaces a purine pyrimidine base
pair with a pyrimidine purine base pair. For example, an A T base pair
becomes a T A or a C G base pair.
Mutations are often classified according to the effect they have on the structure of
the gene’s protein product. This change in protein structure can be predicted
using the genetic code table in conjunction with the base sequence of DNA or
mRNA.
Normal A T G G C A A T T CGT T T T T T A CCT A T A G G G DNA coding strand
Met Ala Ile Arg Phe Leu Pro Ile Gly Amino Acid
Silent
A T G G C A A T T CGT T T T T TG CCT A T A G G G DNA coding strand
Mutation
Met Ala Ile Arg Phe Leu Pro Ile Gly Amino Acid
Missense A T G G C A A T TCGT T T T TC A CCT A T A G G G DNA coding strand
Mutation
Met Ala Ile Arg Phe Ser Pro Ile Gly Amino Acid
Nonsense ATG G C A A T T CG T T T T T G A CCT A T A G G G DNA coding strand
Mutation
Met Ala Ile Arg Phe Stop Amino Acid
Frameshift
A T G G C A AT T CGT T T T T A C CT A T A G G G DNA coding strand
Mutation
(1bp deletion) Met Ala Ile Arg Phe Tyr Leu Stop Amino Acid
Figure I 4 2. Some Common Types of Mutations in DNA
Figure I 4 2. Some Common Types of Mutations in DNA
Large Segment Deletions
Large segments of DNA can be deleted from a chromosome during an unequal
crossover in meiosis. Crossover or recombination between homologous chromo
somes is a normal part of meiosis I that generates genetic diversity in
reproductive cells (egg and sperm), a largely beneficial result. In a normal
crossover event, the homologous maternal and paternal chromosomes exchange
4
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
equivalent segments, and although the resultant chromosomes are mosaics of
maternal and paternal alleles, no genetic information has been lost from either
one. On rare occasions, a crossover can be unequal and one of the two homologs
loses some of its genetic information.
MedicalGenetics
HY
α thalassemia is a well known example of a genetic disease in which unequal
crossover has deleted one or more α globin genes from chromosome 16. CriMYdu
chat (intellectual disability, microcephaly, wide set eyes, and a characteristic
kitten like cry) results from a terminal deletion of the short arm of chromosome LY 5.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
High Yield H
Mutations in Splice Sites
Mutations in splice sites affect the accuracy of intron removal fMroEmDIUMhnRNAYIELDduring ME
posttranscriptional processing. If a splice site is lost through mutation, spliceo
LOW YIELD
somes may:
• Delete nucleotides from the adjacent exon
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
• Leave nucleotides of the intron in the processed mRNA
REINFORCEMENT RE
• Use the next normal upstream or downstream splice site, deleting an exon
from the processed mRNA
Mutations in splice sites have now been documented in many different diseases,
including β thalassemia, Gaucher disease, and Tay Sachs.
β THALASSEMIA
There are two genes for the beta chain of hemoglobin. In β thalassemia, there
is a deficiency of β globin protein compared with α globin. A large number of
β globin mutations have been described, including gene deletions, mutations
that slow the transcriptional process, and translational defects involving
nonsense and frameshift mutations. Other mutations involve β globin mRNA
processing (more than 70% of the β globin gene is not encoding information
and eventually must be spliced out), such as splice site mutations at the
consensus sequences. Also, mutations within intron 1 create a new splice site,
resulting in an abnormally long mRNA.
A 9 month old infant of Greek descent was brought to the hospital by
his parents because he became pale, listless, and frequently irritable. The
attending physician noted that the spleen was enlarged and that the infant
was severely anemic. His face had unusual features with large cheekbones
due to deformities in the skull.
β thalassemias are found primarily in Mediterranean areas. It is believed
that, similar to sickle cell anemia and glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency, the abnormality of red blood cells in β thalassemia may protect
against malaria. Splenomegaly is due to the role of the spleen in clearing
damaged red cells from the bloodstream. The excessive activity of the bone
marrow produces bone deformities of the face and other areas. The long
bones of the arms and legs are abnormally weak and fracture easily. The most
common treatment is blood transfusions every 2–3 weeks, but iron overload is
a serious consequence.
5
MY MY
CHAPTER 4 LY| THE GENETIC CODE, MUTATIONS,LY AND TRANSLATION
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion CLINICAL CORRELATE
The mutant alleles in certain diseases, such as Huntington diseaseM, EDIUMfragile YIEXLD HuntingtoMnEDIUM disease,YIELDan autosomal dominant
syndrome, and myotonic dystrophy, differ from their normal counterparts only in disorder, has a mean age of onset in
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
the number of tandem copies of a trinucleotide. In these diseases, the number of
decade 4. Symptoms appear gradually and
repeats often increases with successive generations and correlates with increasing
worsen over about 15 years until death
severity and decreasing age of onset, a phenomenon called anticipation. For
FUNDAMENTALS occurs. FUNMDoAodMENTdAisLtuSrbance, impaired memory,
example, in the normal Huntington allele, there are 5 tandem repeats of CAG in
the coding region. Affected family members may have 30–60 of RthEeIsNeFORCECMAGENT and hype R rr E e I f N le F x O ia RCEMENT are often the first signs,
repeats. The normal protein contains 5 adjacent glutamine residues, whereas the followed by abnormal gait, chorea (loss of
proteins encoded by the disease associated alleles have 30 or more adjacent motor control), dystonia, dementia, and
glutamines. The long glutamine tract makes the abnormal proteins extremely
dysphagia.
unstable. A major clinical manifestation of the trinucleotide repeat expansion
disorders is neurodegeneration of specific neurons. Cases of juvenile onset (age <10) are more
severe and most frequently occur when the
The expansion of the trinucleotide repeat in the mutant allele can be in a coding
defective allele is inherited paternally. About
region or in an untranslated region of the gene.
25% of cases have late onset, slower
Table I 4 1. Two Classes of Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion Diseases progression, and milder symptoms.
Translation repeat disorders
(polyglutamine disorders) Untranslated repeat disorders
Huntington disease: (CAG)n Fragile X syndrome: (CGG)n
Spinobulbar muscular atrophy: Myotonic dystrophy: (CTG)n
(CAG)n
Friedreich’s ataxia: (GAA)n
AMINO ACID ACTIVATION AND CODON TRANSLATION BY
tRNAs
Inasmuch as amino acids have no direct affinity for mRNA, an adapter molecule,
which recognizes an amino acid on one end and its corresponding codon on the
other, is required for translation. This adapter molecule is tRNA.
5
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Amino Acid Activation
As tRNAs enter the cytoplasm, each combines with its cognate amino acid in a
process called amino acid activation.
MedicalGenetics
R O
+
H3N C
OH R O H O
+
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
3 ́ end H3N C C 3 ́ end
P P
H O
5 ́ end 5 ́ end
Amino
acid ATP AMP PPi+
aminoacyl tRNA
synthetase
anticodon anticodon
tRNA Aminoacyl tRNA
Figure I 4 3. FiAguctrievationI 4 3. AcotifvatioAnmino of AmAicniod Acfidor forProtPerinotein SSyyntnhtehseissis
• Each type of amino acid is activated by a different aminoacyl tRNA
synthetase.
• Two high energy bonds from an ATP are required.
• The aminoacyl tRNA synthetase transfers the activated amino acid to the
3 ́ end of the correct tRNA.
• The amino acid is linked to its cognate tRNA with an energy rich bond.
• This bond will later supply energy to make a peptide bond linking the
amino acid into a protein.
Aminoacyl tRNA synthetases have self checking functions to prevent incorrectly
paired aminoacyl tRNAs from forming. If, however, an aminoacyl tRNA synthe
tase does release an incorrectly paired product (ala tRNAser), there is no mecha
nism during translation to detect the error and an incorrect amino acid will be
introduced into some protein.
Each tRNA has an anticodon sequence that allows it to pair with the codon for its
cognate amino acid in the mRNA. Because base pairing is involved, the orientation
of this interaction will be complementary and antiparallel. For example, the amino
acyl tRNA arg tRNAarg has an anticodon sequence, UCG, allowing it to pair with
the arginine codon CGA.
TRANSLATION (PROTEIN SYNTHESIS)
Protein synthesis occurs by peptide bond formation between successive amino
acids whose order is specified by a gene and thus by an mRNA. The formation of a
peptide bond between the carboxyl group on one amino acid and the amino group
of another is illustrated below.
52
CHAPTER 4 | THE GENETIC CODE, MUTATIONS, AND TRANSLATION
Peptide Bond
O O O O
+ – – + –
H3N CH C O + H3N CH C O H3N CH C N CH C O
+ H
CH2 CH2 CH2 CH2
CH2 CH2
S S
CH3 OH CH3 OH
Met Tyr Met Tyr
FigFuigreure II4 44.4.PeptPideeptide Bond BFonodrmationFormation
During translation, the amino acids are attached to the 3′ ends of their respective
tRNAs. The aminoacyl–tRNAs are situated in the P and A sites of the ribosome as
shown in the figure below. Notice that the peptide bond forms between the
carboxyl group of the amino acid (or growing peptide) in the P site and the amino
group of the next amino acid in the A site. Proteins are synthesized from the
amino to the carboxyl terminus.
P A
Bond breaks
tRNAmet tRNAtyr
O O
+ +
H3N CH C O H3N CH C O
CH2 CH2
CH2 New
peptide
S
bond
CH3 OH HY HY
MY MY
Figure I 4 5. Formation of a Peptide Bond
Figure I 4 5. Formation of a Peptide Bond by a Ribosome During Translation LY LY
by a Ribosome During Translation
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Steps of Translation
Translation occurs in the cytoplasm of both prokaryotic (Pr) anMdEDIUeMukaryotic YIELD (Eu) MEDIUM YIELD
cells. In prokaryotes, ribosomes can begin translating the mRNA even before RNA
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
polymerase completes its transcription. In eukaryotes, translation and transcrip
tion are completely separated in time and space with transcription in the nucleus
and translation in the cytoplasm. The process of protein synthesis occurs in 3
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
stages: initiation, elongation, and termination.
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
Special protein factors for initiation (IF), elongation (EF), and termination (release
factors), as well as GTP, are required for each stage.
5
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
INITIATION
Small ribosomal
UAC 5 ́ P A 3 ́
subunit A
MedicalGenetics AU G CU G A A
IFs UAC
5 ́ A U G CU G AA 3 ́ met met
5 ́ cap or Shine met tRNA; (Eu) Large
BehavioralScience/SocialScience ( s Eu) Dalgarno or subunit
(Pr) fmet tRNA; (Pr)
ELONGATION
5 ́
P A P A P A
5 ́ 3 ́ 5 ́ 3 ́ 3 ́
A A
AUG CU G AA AUG CU G AA AUG CUG A A A
UAC GAC UAC GAC G AC
met Leu
tRNA Pbeipntdisde to A site bond forms. Peptidyl Translocation of ribosome 3 Aminoacyl
GTP transferase in large subunit nucleotides along the mRNA
GTP
EF TU and EFTS (Pr)
EF G(Pr)
eEF 1(Eu)
eEF 2(Eu)
Shiga toxin inhibits
Pseudomonas and diphtheria
(cuts 28S rRNA)
toxin inhibit (ADP ribosylation)
eEF 2
Elongation cycle repeats for each amino acid added
TERMINATION
P A
5 ́
3 ́ Completed protein released from ribosome
GCG UA G STOP CODON Ribosomal subunits separate
CGC
in A Site mRNA Released
Ala Ala COOH
Lys
Lys
Leu Leu
H2N met H2N met
Figure I 4 6. Steps in Translation
Figure I 4 6. Steps in Translation
54
CHAPTER 4 | THE GENETIC CODE, MUTATIONS, AND TRANSLATION
Initiation
The small ribosomal subunit binds to the mRNA. In prokaryotes, the 16S rRNA of
the small subunit binds to the Shine Dalgarno sequence in the 5′ untranslated
region of the mRNA. In eukaryotes, the small subunit binds to the 5′ cap structure
and slides down the message to the first AUG.
The charged initiator tRNA becomes bound to the AUG start codon on the
message through base pairing with its anticodon. The initiator tRNA in prokary
otes carries fMet, whereas the initiator tRNA in eukaryotes carries Met.
The large subunit binds to the small subunit, forming the completed initiation
complex.
There are 2 important binding sites on the ribosome called the P site and the
A site.
• The peptidyl site (P site) is the site on the ribosome where fMet–tRNAi
initially binds. After formation of the first peptide bond, the P site is a
binding site for the growing peptide chain.
• The aminoacyl site (A site) binds each new incoming tRNA molecule
carrying an activated amino acid.
Elongation
Elongation is a 3 step cycle that is repeated for each amino acid added to the
protein after the initiator methionine. Each cycle uses 4 high energy bonds
(2 from the ATP used in amino acid activation to charge the tRNA, and 2 from
GTP). During elongation, the ribosome moves in the 5′ to 3′ direction along the
mRNA, synthesizing the protein from amino to carboxyl terminus. The 3 steps
are:
• A charged tRNA binds in the A site. The particular aminoacyl–tRNA is
determined by the mRNA codon aligned with the A site.
• Peptidyl transferase, an enzyme that is part of the large subunit, forms the
peptide bond between the new amino acid and the carboxyl end of the
growing polypeptide chain. The bond linking the growing peptide to the
tRNA in the P site is broken, and the growing peptide attaches to the
tRNA located in the A site.
• In the translocation step, the ribosome moves exactly 3 nucleotides (one
codon) along the message. This moves the growing peptidyl–tRNA into
the P site and aligns the next codon to be translated with the empty A site.
In eukaryotic cells, elongation factor 2 (eEF 2) used in translocation is inactivated
through ADP ribosylation by Pseudomonas and Diphtheria toxins.
Shiga and Shiga like toxins clip an adenine residue from the 28S rRNA in the 60S
subunit stopping protein synthesis in eukaryotic cells.
Termination
When any of the 3 stop (termination or nonsense) codons moves into the A site,
peptidyl transferase (with the help of release factor) hydrolyzes the completed
protein from the final tRNA in the P site. The mRNA, ribosome, tRNA, and factors
can all be reused for additional protein synthesis.
5
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Recall Question
Which of the following terms is used to describe a disease that,
from generation to generation, shows a decrease in the age of
MedicalGenetics
onset and an increase in the severity of symptoms?
A. Acception
B. Assumption
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
C. Anticipation
D. Mutation
Answer: C
POLYSOMES
Messenger RNA molecules are very long compared with the size of a ribosome,
allowing room for several ribosomes to translate a message at the same time.
Because ribosomes translate mRNA in the 5′ to 3′ direction, the ribosome closest
to the 3′ end has the longest nascent peptide. Polysomes are found free in the
cytoplasm or attached to the rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER), depending on
the protein being translated.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Gray baby syndrome is a dangerous INHIBITORS OF PROTEIN SYNTHESIS
condition that occurs in newborns Some well known inhibitors of prokaryotic translation include streptomycin,
(especially premature babies) who are given erythromycin, tetracycline, and chloramphenicol. Inhibitors of eukaryotic
the drug chloramphenicol. Chloramphenicol translation include cycloheximide and Diphtheria and Pseudomonas toxins.
is a drug used to fight bacterial infections,
Certain antibiotics (for example, chloramphenicol) inhibit mitochondrial protein
including meningitis. If given to a newborn,
synthesis, but not cytoplasmic protein synthesis, because mitochondrial ribosomes
however, this drug can trigger a potentially are similar to prokaryotic ribosomes.
deadly reaction. Babies do not have
sufficient UDP glucuronyl transferase activity
needed to allow excretion of this drug. The PROTEIN FOLDING AND SUBUNIT ASSEMBLY
drug builds up in the baby’s bloodstream
As proteins emerge from ribosomes, they fold into 3 dimensional conformations
and can lead to:
that are essential for their subsequent biologic activity. Generally, 4 levels of
protein shape are distinguished:
• Blue lips, nail beds, and skin
(cyanosis)
Primary—sequence of amino acids specified in the gene.
• Death
Secondary—folding of the amino acid chain into an energetically stable
structure. Two common examples are the α helix and the β pleated
• Low blood pressure
sheet. These shapes are reinforced by hydrogen bonds. An individual
protein may contain both types of secondary structures. Some proteins,
like collagen, contain neither but have their own more characteristic
secondary structures.
5
CHAPTER 4 | THE GENETIC CODE, MUTATIONS, AND TRANSLATION
Tertiary—positioning of the secondary structures in relation to each
other to generate higher order 3 dimensional shapes (the domains of
the IgG molecule are examples). Tertiary structure also includes the
shape of the protein as a whole (globular, fibrous). Tertiary structures
are stabilized by weak bonds (hydrogen, hydrophobic, ionic) and, in
some proteins, strong, covalent disulfide bonds. Agents such as heat or
urea disrupt tertiary structure to denature proteins, causing loss of
function.
Quaternary—in proteins such as hemoglobin that have multiple
subunits, quaternary structure describes the interactions among
subunits.
TRANSLATION OCCURS ON FREE RIBOSOMES
AND ON THE ROUGH ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM
Although all translation of eukaryotic nuclear genes begins on ribosomes free in
the cytoplasm, the proteins being translated may belong in other locations. For
example, certain proteins are translated on ribosomes associated with the rough
endoplasmic reticulum (RER), including:
• Secreted proteins
• Proteins inserted into the cell membrane
• Lysosomal enzymes
HY HY
Proteins translated on free cytoplasmic ribosomes include:
MY MY
• Cytoplasmic proteins
LY LY
• Mitochondrial proteins (encoded by nuclear genes)
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Molecular Chaperones and Proteasomes
Protein folding is an essential step in the final synthesis of any MpEroDteIiUnM. ThYerIeELD is a MEDIUM YIELD
class of specialized proteins, chaperones, whose function is to assist in this
process. Molecular chaperones function in many cell compartments, LOinWcludingYIELD the LOW YIELD
endoplasmic reticulum, where extensive protein synthesis occurs. Failure to fold
correctly usually results in eventual destruction of the protein.
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
5
Immunology
MY
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY LY
Biochemistry
High Yield H
Proteasomes and Ubiquitin
Whenever protein synthesis occurs in a cell, a few copies of a pMarEticDuIlUarM pYrIoEteLiDn ME
may not fold correctly. These defective copies are covalently marked for destruc
LOW YIELD
tion by the addition of multiple copies of ubiquitin. Polyubiquitinated proteins are
MedicalGenetics
directed to proteasomes for destruction. Proteasomes are large, cytoplasmic
complexes that have multiple protease activities capable of digesting damaged
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
proteins to peptides. Proteasomes also play a role in producing antigenic peptides
for presentation by class I MHC molecules. REINFORCEMENT RE
BehavioralScience/SoCciLalISNcIiCenAcLes CORRELATE
The majority of cases of cystic fibrosis
Ubiquitin
result from the deletion of phenylalanine at
position 508 (∆F508), which interferes with U U Proteasome U
proper protein folding and the U U
Peptide
U
posttranslational processing of fragments
U
oligosaccharide side chains. The abnormal
chloride channel protein (CFTR) is degraded
by the cytosolic proteasome complex rather Misfolded
than being translocated to the cell protein
membrane. Other functional defects in CFTR
protein reaching the cell membrane may Figure FigIur4e 7.ID4eg7ra.daDtioengradation of ofMiMsfoislfdoeldded PProrotetieninss by bPyroteaPsroomteeassomes
also contribute to the pathogenesis of cystic
Many proteins require signals to ensure delivery to the appropriate organelles.
fibrosis.
Especially important among these signals are:
• The N terminal hydrophobic signal sequence used to ensure translation on
the RER
• Phosphorylation of mannose residues important for directing an enzyme
to a lysosome
The targeting process for these proteins is illustrated below.
5
CHAPTER 4 | THE GENETIC CODE, MUTATIONS, AND TRANSLATION
mannose
causes ER removes required lysosomes
continues phosphotransferase
begins to sequence ER Golgi of lysosome
cytoplasm attach in
transfGerolgi
sequence peptidase RER Glycoisnylation is of
Translation to signal Translation (continues folding p to rotein To Phosphoryla to tion
on for
ribosomes signals
in ER
Signal Proper
Signatlhe
in
by
Proteins
3 ́ lumen Lysosomal
Cytoplasm Glycosylation glycosylation
P) Proteins
ER (Dolichol Golgi
́3 Lysosomal
and
the
5́ N linked Membrane,
N in and
sequence ́
5
Termi h n y a d l rophobic N signal (SRP) ́3 O membrane Membrane,
recognition N secretion
N Golgi
signal Involves particle Secretory, Secretory,
N ́5
cell
or
́3
To
́5 of
of
Synthesis
Synthesis
8.
4
I
Microftiulabmuleents Figure 8.
(RER) 4
endoplasmic 1
Figure
Rough
reticulum &
(SER)
Mitochondrion
Peroxisomes endoplasmic
Lysosome apparatus
reticulum
Nucleus Smooth
Golgi
59
Immunology
MY
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY LY
Biochemistry
High Yield H
N Terminal Hydrophobic Signal Sequence
This sequence is found on proteins destined to be secreted (insulinM),EDIUM placedYIELDin the ME
cell membrane (Na+ K+ ATPase), or ultimately directed to the lysosome (sphingo
LOW YIELD
myelinase). These proteins all require N terminal hydrophobic signal sequences as
MedicalGenetics
part of their primary structure. Translation begins on free cytoplasmic ribosomes,
but after translation of the signal sequence, the ribosome is positioned on the ER
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
(now RER) with the help of a signal recognition particle. During translation, the
nascent protein is fed through the membrane of the RER and captuRrEedINFORCEMinENTthe R
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences lumen. The signal sequence is cleaved off in the ER, and then the protein passes
into the Golgi for further modification and sorting.
In transit through the ER and Golgi, most proteins acquire oligosaccharide side
chains, becoming glycoproteins. N glycosylation refers to the addition of sugar
chains to the nitrogen of asparagine residues (N linked). The attachment of sugars
in N glycosylation begins in the ER (cotranslational modification) and requires the
participation of a special lipid called dolichol phosphate. The N linked sugar chain
can further be modified upon entry in the Golgi (posttranslational modification).
O glycosylation refers to the addition of sugar chains to the hydroxyl group of either
serine or threonine residues of the protein, and it occurs exclusively in the Golgi
(posttranslational modification). Depending on the particular glycoprotein, some
proteins are solely N glycosylated (for example, transferrin); some are solely
O glycosylated (for example, heparin); and some are both N and O glycosylated
(for example, LDL receptor). Significantly, the structure and sequence of the
oligosaccharide chains on proteins and lipids (glycolipids) are the basis of the A, B, O
blood groups.
Accumulation or ineffective targeting of misfolded proteins
Proteins synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum must fold correctly for trans
port to the Golgi and then to their final destinations. In certain genetic diseases,
the mutation may cause all copies of the protein to fold incorrectly. The result is
loss of protein function and, in some cases, accumulation of the misfolded protein
in the endoplasmic reticulum.
α1 ANTITRYPSIN DEFICIENCY
A 70 year old woman with elevated liver function tests was being
evaluated for cirrhosis. Her serum α1 antitrypsin level was 25 mg/dL
(normal 90–225 mg/dL). A liver biopsy showed micronodular cirrhosis
and prominent fibrosis. Immunohistochemical studies showed intense
staining with α1 antitrypsin antibody. The patient was tested for likely
mutations in the α1 antitrypsin gene and found to be homozygous for
the Z mutation (ZZ). This mutation causes the α1 antitrypsin protein to
misfold and aggregate in the endoplastic reticulum, where it damages cells,
eventually leading to cirrhosis. She had no evidence of pulmonary disease.
α1 antitrypsin is a protein synthesized primarily by the liver and secreted in the
bloodstream. Its function is to protect cells by serving as an inhibitor of proteases
released during a normal inflammatory response. Among the more than 90
allelic variants of the α1 antitrypsin gene, the Z and S variants are most often
encountered with α1 antitrypsin deficiency. Both are the result of point mutations,
which can be detected with the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique.
60
MY MY
CHAPTER 4 LY| THE GENETIC CODE, MUTATIONS,LY AND TRANSLATION
Lysosomal Enzymes and High Yield BRIDGE HIGTHO AYNIAETLODMY
Phosphorylation of Mannose MEDIUM YIELD LysosomMesEDIUM YIELD
Lysosomal enzymes are glycosylated and modified in a characteristic way. Most • Organelles whose major function is to
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
importantly, when they arrive in the Golgi apparatus, specific mannose residues
digest materials that the cell has
located in their N linked oligosaccharide chains are phosphorylated by N
ingested by endocytosis.
acetylglucosamine 1 phosphotransferase, forming a critical mannFoUseNDAMENTA6LSphosphate FUNDAMENTALS
in the oligosaccharide chain. This phosphorylation is the critical event that • Contain multiple enzymes that,
removes them from the secretion pathway and directs them to RlEyIsNosFoOmResC.EMENT co R ll E e I c N tiv F e O ly R , CEMENT digest carbohydrates
Genetic defects affecting this phosphorylation produce I cell disease in which
(glycosylases), lipids (lipases), and
lysosomal enzymes are released into the extracellular space, and inclusion bodies
proteins (proteases).
accumulate in the cell, compromising its function.
• Especially prominent in cells such as
neutrophils and macrophages, though
MAJOR SYMPTOMS OF I CELL DISEASE they serve this essential role in almost
all cells.
A child aged 5 months was referred to a specialist. The child had been
born with dislocated hips and a coarse featured face. He had been suffering When a lysosomal enzyme is missing (for
repeated upper respiratory tract infections and did not seem to be instance in a genetic disease such as
developing his motor abilities. Clinical examination revealed hyperplasia Tay Sachs), the undigested substrate
of the gums, restriction of joint mobility and hepatosplenomegaly. On accumulates in the cell, often leading to
listening to the heart a mitral valve murmur could be detected. Further
serious consequences.
investigation involved cell culture of the child’s fibroblasts obtained from a
skin biopsy. Examination of the fibroblasts under the microscope revealed
the presence of numerous intracellular inclusions, which on electron
microscopy were revealed to be large lysosomes. Biochemical analysis
showed decreased levels of the lysosomal hydrolase ß glucuronidase
within the fibroblasts, but elevated levels of this enzyme within the culture
medium. A diagnosis of I cell disease was made.
• Coarse facial features, gingival hyperplasia, macroglossia
• Craniofacial abnormalities, joint immobility, clubfoot, claw hand, scoliosis
• Psychomotor retardation, growth retardation
• Cardiorespiratory failure, death in first decade
• Bone fracture and deformities
• Mitral valve defect
• Secretion of active lysosomal enzymes into blood and extracellular fluid
CO AND POSTTRANSLATIONAL COVALENT MODIFICATIONS
In addition to disulfide bond formation while proteins are folding, other covalent
modifications include:
• Glycosylation: addition of oligosaccharide as proteins pass through the ER
and Golgi apparatus
• Proteolysis: cleavage of peptide bonds to remodel proteins and activate
them (proinsulin, trypsinogen, prothrombin)
• Phosphorylation: addition of phosphate by protein kinases
6
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
• γ Carboxylation: produces Ca2+ binding sites
• Prenylation: addition of farnesyl or geranylgeranyl lipid groups to certain
membrane associated proteins
MedicalGenetics
POSTTRANSLATIONAL MODIFICATIONS OF COLLAGEN
Collagen is an example of a protein that undergoes several important co and
posttranslational modifications. It has a somewhat unique primary structure in
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
that much of its length is composed of a repeating tripeptide Gly X Y Gly X Y etc.
Hydroxyproline is an amino acid unique to collagen. The hydroxyproline is
produced by hydroxylation of prolyl residues at the Y positions in procollagen
chains as they pass through the RER.
1. Prepro α chains containing a hydrophobic signal sequence are synthesized by
ribosomes attached to the RER.
2. The hydrophobic signal sequence is removed by signal peptidase in the RER to
form pro α chains.
3. Selected prolines and lysines are hydroxylated by prolyl and lysyl hydroxylases.
These enzymes, located in the RER, require ascorbate (vitamin C), deficiency
of which produces scurvy.
4. Selected hydroxylysines are glycosylated.
5. Three pro α chains assemble to form a triple helical structure (procollagen),
which can now be transferred to the Golgi. Modification of oligosaccharide
continues in the Golgi.
6. Procollagen is secreted from the cell.
7. The propeptides are cleaved from the ends of procollagen by proteases to form
collagen molecules (also called tropocollagen).
8. Collagen molecules assemble into fibrils. Cross linking involves lysyl oxidase,
an enzyme that requires O2 and copper.
9. Fibrils aggregate and cross link to form collagen fibers.
Table I 4 2. Collagen
Collagen Tissue
Type Characteristics Distribution Associated Diseases
I Bundles of fibers Bone, skin, Osteogenesis
tendons imperfecta
High tensile strength
Ehlers Danlos (various)
II Thin fibrils Cartilage -- ---
Structural Vitreous humor
III Thin fibrils Blood vessels Ehlers Danlos
Pliable Granulation Type IV
tissue
Keloid formation
IV Amorphous Basement Goodpasture
membranes syndrome
Alport disease
6
CHAPTER 4 | THE GENETIC CODE, MUTATIONS, AND TRANSLATION
Synthesis of prepro α chain with
hydrophobic signal sequence
Removal of signal
sequence by
signal peptidase
Rough
Pro α chain
Endoplasmic
Hydroxylation of
Reticulum selected prolines and
(RER) lysines (vitamin C)
OH OH
OH
Glycosylation of
selected
hydroxylysines
n
a
Cytoplasm b r
m
OH
e
M
Triple helix
formation a
m
s
OH s l a
s s P
s
OH
Procollagen secreted from cell Secretion
(procollagen secreted)
OH
s
s s
s
OH
Cleavage of propeptides
OH Collagen
(tropocollagen)
OH
Assembly into fibrils
Stabilized by
lysyl oxidase (Cu+)
to forAmggregation
a collagen fiber
I 4 9. Synthesis of Collagen Figure
Figure I4 9. Synthesis of Collagen
63
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
CLINICAL CORRELATE There are several important diseases associated with defective collagen production.
Ehlers Danlos (ED) syndromes represent a
Table I 4 3. Disorders of Collagen Biosynthesis
collection of defects in the normal synthesis
Disease Defect Major Symptoms
MedicalGeneatincds processing of collagen. Like
osteogenesis imperfecta, these syndromes Scurvy Deficient hydroxylation Petechiae, ecchymoses
are a result of locus heterogeneity in which secondary to ascorbate Loose teeth, bleeding
deficiency gums Poor wound healing
defects in several different genes (loci) can
Poor bone development
BehavioralScience/SorceisaulSltciencesin similar symptoms.
Osteogenesis Mutations in collagen Skeletal deformities
ED Type IV, the vascular type, is an
imperfecta genes Fractures, blue sclera
autosomal dominant disease caused by
Ehlers Danlos Mutations in collagen Hyperextensible, fragile
mutations in the gene for type 3 procollagen.
syndromes genes and proline and skin Hypermobile joints,
Characteristic features include thin,
lysyl hydroxylases dislocations, varicose
translucent skin; arterial, intestinal, or veins, ecchymoses,
uterine rupture; and easy bruising. arterial, intestinal ruptures
Menkes disease Deficient cross linking Depigmented (steely) hair
Also see Section II, Chapter 1; Locus
secondary to functional Arterial tortuosity, rupture
Heterogeneity.
copper deficiency Cerebral degeneration
Osteoporosis, anemia
Recall Question
Vitreous humor is formed from which type of collagen?
A. Type I
B. Type II
C. Type III
D. Type IV
Answer: B
MENKES DISEASE
Menkes disease (or ED Syndrome Type IX [kinky hair syndrome]) is an
X linked recessive disease (incidence 1/100,000). As with other ED diseases,
symptoms are in part due to weak collagen.
A 4 month old infant who failed to grow and appeared intellectually
disabled was seen at the clinic. An arteriogram showed elongation
and tortuosity of the major arteries. Additional tests revealed bladder
diverticula and subdural hematomas, plus low serum ceruloplasmin and
only 10% of normal serum copper. The child’s hair is also noted to be
abnormally kinky and hypopigmented.
Menkes is caused by mutations in the gene ATP7A, which encodes an ATP
dependent copper efflux protein in the intestine. Copper can be absorbed
into the mucosal cell but it cannot be transported into the bloodstream. Thus,
patients have severe copper deficiency, and all copper requiring enzymes are
adversely affected. Lysyl oxidase requires copper and plays a direct role in
collagen formation by catalyzing the cross linking of collagen fibrils.
6
CHAPTER 4 | THE GENETIC CODE, MUTATIONS, AND TRANSLATION
Table I 4 4. Important Points About the Genetic Code, Mutations, and Translation
Prokaryotic Eukaryotic
Genetic code Start: AUG (also codes for Met)
Stop: UAG, UGA, UAA
Unambiguous (1 codon = 1 amino acid)
Redundant (1 amino acid >1 codon); often differ at base 3
Mutations Point mutations: silent, missense, nonsense
Frameshift (delete 1 or 2 nucleotides; not multiple of 3)
Large segment deletion
Mutation in splice site Trinucleotide repeat
expansion
Amino acid Aminoacyl tRNA synthetase: two high energy bonds (ATP) to link amino acid to tRNA
activation
Translation: 30S subunit binds to Shine Dalgarno 40S subunit associates with 5′ cap on mRNA
Initiation sequence on mRNA
fMet–tRNAi binds to P site Met–tRNAi binds to P site
GTP required GTP required
Translation: Charged aminoacyl–tRNA binds to Charged aminoacyl–tRNA binds to A site (GTP)
Elongation A site (GTP)
Peptide bond forms (two high energy 28S rRNA is cut by Shiga and Shiga like toxins
bonds from amino acid activation) removing an adenine residue. Prevents protein
synthesis.
Peptide bond forms (two high energy bonds from
amino acid activation)
Peptidyl transferase (50S subunit) Peptidyl transferase (60S subunit)
Translocation: GTP required Translocation: GTP required
eEF 2 inhibited by Diphtheria and Pseudomonas
toxins
Termination Release of protein; protein synthesized N to C
Protein targeting Secreted or membrane proteins: N terminal
hydrophobic signal sequence
Lysosomal enzymes: phosphorylation of
mannose by phosphotransferase in Golgi
I cell disease
Other important Scurvy (prolyl hydroxylase, Vit C)
disease
Menkes Disease (Cu deficiency, lysyl oxidase)
associations
6
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Review Questions
Select the ONE best answer.
1. In the genetic code of human nuclear DNA, one of the codons specifying
MedicalGenetics
the amino acid tyrosine is UAC. Another codon specifying this same amino
acid is
A. AAC
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences B. UAG
C. UCC
D. AUG
E. UAU
Items 2 and 3
A. ATGCAA. . .→ ATGTAA
B. ATGAAA. . .→ GTGAAA
C. TATAAG. ..→ TCTAAG
D. CTTAAG. ..→ GTTAAG
E. ATGAAT. ..→ ATGCAT
The options above represent mutations in the DNA with base changes indicated
in boldface type. For each mutation described in the questions below, choose the
most closely related sequence change in the options above.
2. Nonsense mutation
3. Mutation decreasing the initiation of transcription
4. Accumulation of heme in reticulocytes can regulate globin synthesis by
indirectly inactivating eIF 2. Which of the following steps is most directly
affected by this mechanism?
A. Attachment of spliceosomes to pre mRNA
B. Attachment of the ribosome to the endoplasmic reticulum
C. Met tRNAmet binding to the P site
D. Translocation of mRNA on the ribosome
E. Attachment of RNA polymerase II to the promoter
5. A nasopharyngeal swab obtained from a 4 month old infant with rhinitis
and paroxysmal coughing tested positive upon culture for Bordetella
pertussis. He was admitted to the hospital for therapy with an antibiotic that
inhibits the translocation of the 70S ribosomes on the mRNA. This patient
was most likely treated with
A. erythromycin
B. tetracycline
C. chloramphenicol
D. rifamycin
E. levofloxacin
6
CHAPTER 4 | THE GENETIC CODE, MUTATIONS, AND TRANSLATION
6. A 25 month old Caucasian girl has coarse facial features and gingival
hyperplasia and, at 2 months of age, began developing multiple, progressive
symptoms of intellectual disability, joint contractures, hepatomegaly, and
cardiomegaly. Levels of lysosomal enzymes are elevated in her serum, and
fibroblasts show phase dense inclusions in the cytoplasm. Which of the fol
lowing enzyme deficiencies is most consistent with these observations?
A. Golgi associated phosphotransferase
B. Lysosomal α 1,4 glucosidase
C. Endoplasmic reticulum–associated signal peptidase
D. Cytoplasmic α 1,4 phosphorylase
E. Lysosomal hexosaminidase A
7. Parahemophilia is an autosomal recessive bleeding disorder characterized by
a reduced plasma concentration of the Factor V blood coagulation protein.
Deficiency arises from a 12 base pair deletion in the Factor V gene that
impairs the secretion of Factor V by hepatocytes and results in an abnormal
accumulation of immunoreactive Factor V antigen in the cytoplasm. In which
region of the Factor V gene would this mutation most likely be located?
A. 5′ Untranslated region
B. First exon
C. Middle intron
D. Last exon
E. 3′ Untranslated region
8. Collagen, the most abundant protein in the human body, is present in vary
ing amounts in many tissues. If one wished to compare the collagen content
of several tissues, one could measure their content of
A. glycine
B. proline
C. hydroxyproline
D. cysteine
E. lysine
9. A 6 month old infant is seen in the emergency room with a fractured rib
and subdural hematoma. The child’s hair is thin, colorless, and tangled. His
serum copper level is 5.5 nM (normal for age, 11–12 nM). Developmental
delay is prominent. A deficiency of which enzyme activity most closely
relates to these symptoms?
A. Lysyl oxidase
B. Prolyl hydroxylase
C. γ Glutamyl carboxylase
D. Phosphotransferase in Golgi
E. α 1,4 glucosidase
6
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
10. Respiratory tract infections caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa are associat
ed with the secretion of exotoxin A by this organism. What effect will this
toxin most likely have on eukaryotic cells?
A. Stimulation of nitric oxide (NO) synthesis
MedicalGenetics
B. ADP ribosylation of a Gs protein
C. ADP ribosylation of eEF 2
D. ADP ribosylation of a Gi protein
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences E. Stimulation of histamine release
11. A 4 year old toddler with cystic fibrosis (CF) is seen by his physician for an
upper respiratory infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. He is started on
oral ciprofloxacin and is referred to a CF center as a potential candidate for
gene therapy. Prior genetic testing of the patient identified the mutation
causing CF as a 3 base pair deletion in exon 10 of the CF gene. The nucleo
tide sequences of codons 506–511 in this region of the normal and mutant
alleles are compared below.
Codon Number 506 507 508 509 510 511
Normal Gene ATC ATC TTT GGT GTT TCC
Mutant Gene ATC AT• ••T GGT GTT TCC
3 base
deletion
6
CHAPTER 4 | THE GENETIC CODE, MUTATIONS, AND TRANSLATION
What effect will this patient’s mutation have on the amino acid sequence of the
protein encoded by the CF gene?
U C A G
U U U U U U U U C A } Phe U U U C C C U C A } Ser U U U A A A U C A } Tyr U U U G G G U C A } C St y o s p U C A
UUG } Leu UCG UAG } Stop UGG Trp G
C C C C U U U U C A } Leu C C C C C C U C A } Pro C C C A A A U C A } His C C C G G G U C A } Arg U C A
CUG CCG CAG } Gln CGG G
A A A U U U C } lle A A C C U C } Thr A A A A U C } Asn A A G G U C } Ser U C
A A U U A G Met A A C C A G A A A A A G } Lys A A G G A G } Arg A G
GUU GCU GAU } Asp GGU U
G G G U U C A } Val G G C C C A } Ala G G A A C A } Glu G G G G C A } Gly C A
GUG GCG GAG GGG G
A. Deletion of a phenylalanine residue with no change in C terminal
sequence
B. Deletion of a leucine residue causing a change in the C terminal sequence
C. Deletion of a phenylalanine residue causing a change in the C terminal
sequence
D. Deletion of a leucine residue with no change in C terminal sequence
12. A 10 year old boy with severe progressive skin ulceration, decreased resis
tance to infection, and impaired cognitive ability has been diagnosed with a
genetic deficiency of the enzyme prolidase. Mutation analysis has identified
a single base substitution at the 3’ end of intron 6 of the mutant allele as
well as deletion of a 45 base exon (exon 7) in the prolidase cDNA. Which
type of gene mutation was most likely inherited by this boy?
A. Frameshift mutation
B. In frame mutation
C. Missense mutation
D. Nonsense mutation
E. Splice site mutation
6
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Answers
1. Answer: E. UAC and UAU differ at the third nucleotide position (wobble
position) and often specify the same amino acid. Option B would be
MedicalGenetics acceptable, except that it is a stop codon.
2. Answer: A. The sequence now contains TAA, which will be transcribed to
UAA in the mRNA.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences 3. Answer: C. The transcription promoter TATA has been changed to TCTA.
Don’t choose the distractor B. The question is not about translation.
4. Answer: C. eIF 2 designates a protein factor of the initiation phase in
eukaryotic translation. The only event listed that would occur during this
phase is placement of initiator tRNA in the P site.
5. Answer: A. Erythromycin is the antibiotic of choice for pertussis. It inhibits
translocation.
6. Answer: A. Characteristic symptoms of I cell disease. Note release of
lysosomal enzymes into serum, which would not be seen in the other
deficiencies.
7. Answer: B. Decreased factor V secretion and a corresponding accumula
tion of cytoplasmic antigen suggest a defect in the translocation of the
nascent protein to the endoplasmic reticulum. This implies a mutation in
the N terminal amino acid signal sequence required for targeting to the ER
and encoded by the first exon of the gene.
8. Answer: C. Hydroxyproline is found uniquely in collagen. Although collagen
is also rich in glycine, many other proteins contain significant amounts of
glycine.
9. Answer: A. The child has Menkes disease, in which cellular copper trans
port is abnormal and produces a functional copper deficiency. Lysyl oxidase
in collagen metabolism requires copper. His fragile bones and blood vessels
result from weak, poorly crosslinked connective tissue.
10. Answer: C. Pseudomonas and diphtheria toxins inhibit eEF 2, the translo
cation factor in eukaryotic translation.
11. Answer: A. Deletion of CTT results only in the loss of phe 508; ile 507 and
the C terminal sequence are unaltered because ATC and ATT both code for
ile (the coding sequence is unchanged).
12. Answer: E. A base substitution at an intron exon junction, which leads to
the deletion of an entire exon is indicative of a splice site mutation.
7
Regulation of Eukaryotic
5#
Gene Expression
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Demonstrate understanding of regulation of eukaryotic gene
expression
❏ Know concept and examples of specific transcription factors
GENETIC REGULATION
Regulation of gene expression is an essential feature in maintaining the functional
integrity of a cell. Increasing or decreasing the expression of a gene can occur
through various mechanisms, but many of the important ones involve regulating
the rate of transcription. In addition to the basic transcription proteins, RNA
polymerase and TFIID in eukaryotes activator and repressor proteins help control
the rate of the process. These regulatory proteins bind to specific DNA sequences
(enhancer or silencer elements) associated with eukaryotic gene regions.
Other mechanisms are important, and gene expression is controlled at multiple
levels.
REGULATION OF EUKARYOTIC GENE EXPRESSION
In eukaryotic cells, DNA is packaged in chromatin structures, and gene expression
typically requires chromatin remodeling in order to make the desired gene region
accessible to RNA polymerase and other proteins (transcription factors) required
for gene expression. Important aspects of chromatin remodeling include:
• Transcription factors that bind to the DNA and recruit other coactivators
such as histone acetylases
• Histone acetylases (favor gene expression) and deacetylases (favor inactive
chromatin)
• Certain lysyl residues in the histones are acetylated decreasing the positive
charge and weakening the interaction with DNA.
• A chromatin remodeling engine that binds to acetylated lysyl residues and
reconfigures the DNA to expose the promoter region.
• Additional transcription factors bind in the promoter region and recruit
RNA polymerase.
7
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
H3 H3
H2A H2A
MedicalGenetics H2B Transcription H2B
H4 factor H4
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Transcription
factor
Co activator
histone
acetylase
Transcription
factor
Histone
acetylase
Acetylated lysyl
residues in
histone tails
Chromatin remodeling engine binds to acetylated lysyl
residues and reconfigures the nucleosome to expose sites
for additional transcription factors (TBP, TFIID, and others).
Figure I 5 1.
Figure I 5 1. Chromatin Remodeling
Once the transcription complex is formed, basal (low level) transcription occurs,
maintaining moderate but adequate levels of the protein encoded by this gene in
the cell. The transcription factors assembled in this complex are referred to as
general transcription factors.
There are times when the expression of the gene should be increased in response
to specific signals such as hormones, growth factors, intracellular conditions. In
this case there are DNA sequences referred to as response elements that bind
specific transcription factors. Several of these response elements may be grouped
together to form an enhancer that allows control of gene expression by multiple
signals.
–75 –25 +1
CCAAT UPE TATA Transcribed
GRE CRE ERE
box GC Rich box regio
1000
Enhancer base pairs Promoter
Figure I 5 2. Enhancers and Upstream Promoter Elements
Figure I 5 2. Enhancers and Upstream Promoter Elements
72
CHAPTER 5 | REGULATION OF EUKARYOTIC GENE EXPRESSION
Upstream Promoter Elements
Only the proximity of the upstream promoter element to the –25 sequence HY HY
distinguishes it from an enhancer. Upstream promoter elements include:
MY MY
• CCAAT box (around –75) that binds a transcription factor NF 1
LY LY
• GC rich sequence that binds a general transcription factor SP 1
High Yield NOTE HIGH YIELD
Enhancers
Enhancers in the DNA are binding sites for activator proteins. MEEnDhaInUcMers YIEhLaDve the The IgMEhDeaIUvyM chainYIELlDocus has an enhancer in
following characteristics: the large intron separating the coding
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
regions for the variable domain from the
• They may be up to 1,000 base pairs away from the gene.
coding regions for the constant domains.
• They may be located upstream, downstream, or within an intron of the
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
gene they control.
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
• The orientation of the enhancer sequence with respect to the gene is not
important.
• They can appear to act in a tissue specific manner if the DNA binding
proteins that interact with them are present only in certain tissues.
• They may be brought close to the basal promoter region in space by
bending of the DNA molecule.
Similar sequences that bind repressor proteins in eukaryotes are called silencers.
There are fewer examples of these sequences known.
Enhancer elements binding
NOTE
specific transcription factors
The DNA regulatory base sequences (e.g.,
CRE GRE ERE DNA
promoters, enhancers, response elements,
CREB Estrogen R and UPEs) in the vicinity of genes that serve
C as binding sites for proteins are often called
P E
“cis” regulators.
Cortisol R
DNA
RNA Transcription factors (and the genes that
bending
pol II
code for them) are called “trans”
NF 1 SP 1 TFIID
regulators. Trans regulatory proteins can
TBP
diffuse through the cell to their point of
action.
CAAT UPE GC TATA
Transcription
RICH rich
Increased rate
Promoter elements binding general (basal) of transcription
transcription factors and RNA polymerase
FigureFigure I I55 33.. SSttiimmuullaattiioonn of TraonfscripTtriaonnscriptionby an by an
EnhancerEnhancer andand IIttss AAssssoocciaiatetedd TranscripTtiroannscriptionFactors Factors
7
Immunology
MY
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY LY
Biochemistry
High Yield H
Transcription Factors
The activator proteins that bind response elements are often refeMrrEedDIUM to aYsIELtrDan ME
scription factors. Typically, transcription factors contain at least 2 recognizable
LOW YIELD
domains, a DNA binding domain and an activation domain.
MedicalGenetics
• The DNA binding domain binds to a specific nucleotide sequence in the
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
promoter or response element. Several types of DNA binding domain
motifs have been characterized and have been used to define certain
REINFORCEMENT RE
families of transcription factors. Some common DNA binding domains
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
include:
– Zinc fingers (steroid hormone receptors)
– Leucine zippers (cAMP dependent transcription factor)
– Helix loop helix
– Helix turn helix (homeodomain proteins encoded by homeotic/
homeobox genes)
• The activation domain allows the transcription factor to:
– Bind to other transcription factors and coregulators
– Interact with RNA polymerase II to stabilize the formation of the
initiation complex
– Recruit chromatin modifying proteins such as histone acetylases or
deacetylases
Two types can be distinguished: general transcription factors and specific tran
scription factors.
Table I 5 1. Important Specific Transcription Factors
Transcription Factor Response Element
(DNA Binding Protein) (Binding Site) Function Protein Class
Steroid receptors HRE Steroid response Zinc finger
cAMP response element CRE Response to cAMP Leucine
binding (CREB) protein zipper
Peroxisome proliferator PPREs Regulate multiple aspects Zinc finger
activated receptors of lipid metabolism
(PPARs)
Activated by fibrates and
thiazolidinediones
NFkB (nuclear factor k—B—Reegleumlaetensts expression of Rel domains
kappa B) many genes in immune
system
Homeodomain proteins Regulate gene expression Helix turn helix
during development
General Transcription Factors
In eukaryotes, general transcription factors must bind to the promoter to allow
RNA polymerase II to bind and form the initiation complex at the start site for
transcription. General transcription factors are common to most genes. The
general transcription factor TFIID with its TATA box binding protein subunit
7
CHAPTER 5 | REGULATION OF EUKARYOTIC GENE EXPRESSION
HY HY
(TBP) must bind to the TATA box before RNA polymerase II can bind. OthMerY MY
examples include SP 1 and NF 1 that modulate basal transcription of many
genes. LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Specific Transcription Factors
Specific transcription factors bind to enhancer regions or, in aMfeEwDIUMcases, YItoELD MEDIUM YIELD
silencers and modulate the formation of the initiation complex, thus regulating
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
the rate of initiation of transcription. Each gene contains a variety of enhancer or
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY
silencer sequences in its regulatory region. The exact combination of specific
transcription factors available (and active) in a particular cell at a particular Zellweger syndrome is a genetic disease
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
time determines which genes will be transcribed at what rates. Because specific caused by a mutation in any one of several
transcription factors are proteins, their expression can be cell typeREINFsOpeRciCfiEcM.ENT genes (RloEcIuNsFORChEeMteEroNgTeneity) involved in
Additionally, hormones may regulate the activity of some specific transcription
peroxisome biogenesis.
factors. Examples include steroid receptors and the CREB protein.
• Characterized by a deficiency of
Peroxisome proliferator activated receptors (PPARs) are transcription factors that
peroxisomes which causes an
bind to DNA response elements (PPREs) and control multiple aspects of lipid
accumulation of very long chain fatty
metabolism. Individual members of this family of zinc finger proteins are acti
acids and several unusual fatty acids
vated by a variety of natural and xenobiotic ligands, including:
(e.g., hydroxylated and branched fatty
• Fatty acids
acids)
• Prostaglandin derivatives
• Mechanism is a defect in fatty acid
• Fibrates
efflux from peroxisomes
• Thiazolidinediones
• Most common features are enlarged
The improvement in insulin resistance seen with thiazolidinediones is thought to liver, high blood levels of Cu and Fe,
be mediated through their interaction with PPARγ. Clofibrate binds PPARα, and vision problems
affecting different aspects of lipid metabolism than the thiazolidinediones.
• In affected infants, there is failure
to grow, intellectual disability,
abnormal muscle tone, and multiple
PEROXISOMES: HYPERTRIGLYCERIDEMIA AND FIBRATES
developmental abnormalities; infants
A 50 year old man sees his physician for increasingly frequent episodes usually die within first year
of acute pain in his upper abdomen and back after meals. The physician
orders fasting blood tests and the results are notable for mild hypocalcemia
(8.4 mg/dL; normal 8.9–10.3 mg/dL) and hypertriglyceridemia (500 mg/dL;
normal <200 mg/mL) with increased VLDL. Total cholesterol (170 mg/dL;
normal <200 mg/dL), LDL cholesterol (100 mg/dL; normal <130 mg/dL),
and HDL (34 mg/dL; normal 34–86 mg/dL) are within normal ranges. The
patient is put on a low fat diet and given a prescription for gemfibrozil.
Peroxisomes are single membrane organelles that accomplish β oxidation
of long and very long chain fatty acids similar to the mitochondrial
β oxidation pathway. One notable difference of the peroxisome pathway is
that peroxisomes generate hydrogen peroxide from fatty acid oxidation. They
also conduct oxidation of branched fatty acids and ω oxidation of ordinary
fatty acids. Gemfibrozil is a hypolipidemic drug that is prescribed to treat
certain types of hyperlipoproteinemia, notably elevated blood triglycerides
with normal cholesterol and LDL; it acts by stimulating proliferation of
peroxisomes and increasing gene expression of lipoprotein lipase, resulting in
the induction of the fatty acid oxidation pathway in these organelles.
7
Immunology
MY
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY LY
Biochemistry
High Yield H
Control of Gluconeogenesis by
Response Elements MEDIUM YIELD ME
An example of how response elements affect metabolism can be seen in the
LOW YIELD
MedicalGenetics pathway of gluconeogenesis below.
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
Glucagon
REINFORCEMENT RE
Cortisol
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Glucose
[cAMP] Hepatocyte
Glucose
Protein
kinase A
Phosphoenolpyruvate
Cortisol (PEP)
Active
CREB
PEP
Carboxykinase
(PEPCK)
OAA
Cortisol
CREB Amino
PEPCK acids
GRE CRE
gene
mRNA
Nucleus
Figure I 5 4. Cortisol and Glucagon Stimulate Gluconeogenesis
Through Enhancer Mechanisms
Figure I 5 4. Cortisol and Glucagon Stimulate Gluconeogenesis
through Enhancer Mechanisms
Gluconeogenesis is a hepatic pathway whose major function is to maintain
adequate glucose in the blood for tissues such as the nerves (brain) and red blood
cells during fasting. It also provides glucose during periods of stress. Hormones
that activate the pathway include:
• Glucagon secreted in response to hypoglycemia and functioning via a
membrane associated receptor that increases cAMP concentration
• Cortisol secreted in response to stress; permissive for glucagon in hypogly
cemia and acts through an intracellular receptor, which, like other steroid
receptors, is a zinc finger DNA binding protein
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) catalyzes a critical reaction in
gluconeogenesis, which under many conditions is the rate limiting step in the
pathway. A cAMP response element (CRE) and a glucocorticoid response element
(GRE) are each located upstream from the transcription start site.
7
CHAPTER 5 | REGULATION OF EUKARYOTIC GENE EXPRESSION
Cortisol induces PEPCK gene expression by the following sequence:
• Cortisol diffuses into the hepatocyte, where it
• Binds to its receptor.
• The complex enters the nucleus, and
• Binds (through the zinc fingers) to the glucocorticoid response element
(GRE) associated with the PEPCK gene, which
• Increases gene expression.
• PEPCK concentration increases in the cell.
• The rate of gluconeogenesis increases.
Glucagon induces PEPCK gene expression by the following sequence:
• Glucagon binds to a receptor in the cell membrane (Chapter 9).
• cAMP concentration increases.
• Protein kinase A becomes active, and then
• Phosphorylates and activates CREB.
• Activated CREB enters the nucleus and binds to the CRE associated with
the PEPCK gene, which
• Increases gene expression.
• PEPCK concentration increases in the cell.
• The rate of gluconeogenesis increases.
These effects of CREB and the cortisol receptor complex are not entirely indepen
dent of each other. Each contributes, along with several other transcription factors,
to assembling a complex of activator proteins that ultimately determine the level of
PEPCK gene expression.
Recall Question
Which of the following protein classes is related to the transcription
factor for steroid receptors?
A. Helix turn helix
B. Leucine zipper
C. Rel domains
D. Zinc fingers
Answer: D
7
Immunology
MY
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY LY
Biochemistry
High Yield H
CLINICAL CORRELATE Control of Cell Differentiation by
All of the tissues affected in Klein Homeodomain Proteins During MEDIUM YIELD ME
Waardenburg syndrome are derived from Development In Utero
LOW YIELD
MedicalGeneetimcsbryonic tissue in which PAX 3 is
Sequential and coordinated gene expression is necessary for proper tissue and cell
expressed. Symptoms include: differentiation during embryonic life. Groups of regulatory proteins called
homeodomain proteins are major factors in controlling this embryFoUnNicDAMENTALgSene FUN
• Dystopia canthorum (lateral
expression. Each regulatory protein is responsible for activating a different set of
displacement of the inner corner of REINFORCEMENT RE
genes at the proper time in development.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
the eye)
The regulatory proteins themselves are encoded by genes called homeobox (HOX)
• Pigmentary abnormalities (frontal
or homeotic genes. Another closely related set of genes is the PAX (paired box)
white blaze of hair, patchy genes. Mutations in HOX or PAX genes might be expected to produce develop
hypopigmentation of the skin, mental errors. Klein Waardenburg syndrome (WS III) is one such developmental
heterochromia irides) disorder resulting from a mutation in a PAX gene.
• Congenital deafness
Co Expression of Genes
• Limb abnormalities
Most eukaryotic cells are diploid, each chromosome being present in two homolo
gous copies. The alleles of a gene on the 2 homologous chromosomes are usually
CLINICAL CORRELATE
co expressed. In a person heterozygous for the alleles of a particular gene, for
Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a common example a carrier of sickle cell trait, two different versions of the protein will be
present in cells that express the gene. In the person heterozygous for the normal
developmental anomaly of the human
and sickle alleles, about 50% of the β globin chains will contain glutamate and 50%
forebrain and midface, where the cerebral
valine at the variable position (specified by codon 6).
hemispheres fail to separate into distinct left
and right halves. Haplo insufficiency for Major exceptions to this rule of codominant expression include genes:
sonic hedgehog (SHH) is a cause of HPE.
• On the Barr body (inactivated X chromosome) in women
• In the immunoglobulin heavy and light chain loci (ensuring that one B
cell makes only one specificity of antibody)
• In the T cell receptor loci
7
CHAPTER 5 | REGULATION OF EUKARYOTIC GENE EXPRESSION
Other Mechanisms for Controlling Gene Expression BRIDGE TO MEDICAL GENETICS
in Eukaryotes Genetic Imprinting in Prader Willi
Syndrome
Some of the mechanisms which control gene expression in eukaryotic cells are
described below. Genetic imprinting of a few gene regions
results in monoallelic expression. In some
Table I 5 2. Control of Eukaryotic Gene Expression and Protein Levels cases, this imprinting is according to the
Control Point Example parent of origin. The gene involved in Prader
Willi syndrome is on chromosome 15 and is
Inactivation of specific chromo One X chromosome in each cell of a
imprinted so that it is normally expressed
somes or chromosomal woman is inactivated by condensation to
regions during development heterochromatin (Barr bodies) only from the paternal, not the maternal,
chromosome.
Local chromatin modifying Acetylation of histones increases gene
activities expression (many genes) Methylation of In such a case, if one inherits a paternal
DNA silences genes in genetic imprinting
chromosome in which this region has been
(Prader Willi and Angelman syndromes)
deleted, Prader Willi syndrome results. It can
Gene amplification Many oncogenes are present in multiple also result from uniparental (maternal)
copies: erbB amplified in certain breast
disomy of chromosome 15. Symptoms of
cancers Dihydrofolate reductase genes
Prader Willi include:
are amplified in some tumors, leading to
drug resistance
• Childhood obesity and hyperphagia
Specific transcription factors Steroid hormone receptors, CREB, and
• Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
homeodomain proteins
• Small hands and feet
Processing mRNA Alternative splicing of mRNA in the
production of membrane bound vs. • Intellectual disability
secreted antibodies
• Hypotonia
Rate of translation Heme increases the initiation of β globin
translation
Protein modification Proinsulin is cleaved to form active
insulin
Protein degradation rate ALA synthase has a half life of 1 hour in
the hepatocyte
7
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Review Questions
Select the ONE best answer.
1. Klein Waardenburg syndrome is a single gene disorder that includes dysto
MedicalGenetics
pia canthorum (lateral displacement of the inner corner of the eye),
impaired hearing, and pigmentary abnormalities. The gene involved is most
likely to be a
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences A. pseudogene
B. proto oncogene
C. transgene
D. homeotic gene
E. tumor suppressor gene
2. Enhancers are transcriptional regulatory sequences that function by
enhancing the activity of
A. general transcriptional factors
B. RNA polymerase to enable the enzyme to transcribe through the termi
nating region of a gene
C. transcription factors that bind to the promoter but not to RNA poly
merase
D. RNA polymerase at a single promoter site
E. spliceosomes
3. A pharmacologist employed by a pharmaceutical company is investigating
the mechanism of action of a new drug that significantly inhibits the divi
sion of tumor cells obtained from patients with acute myelogenous leuke
mia. He has determined that the drug serves as a potent inactivator of
chromatin modifying activity that up regulates the expression of a cluster
of oncogenes in these tumor cells. Which type of chromatin modifying
activity is most likely stimulated by the enzyme target of this drug?
A. Acetylation of core histones
B. Binding of histone H1 to nucleosomes
C. Deacetylation of core histone H4
D. Deamination of cytosine bases in DNA
E. Methylation of cytosine bases in DNA
8
CHAPTER 5 | REGULATION OF EUKARYOTIC GENE EXPRESSION
Answers
1. Answer: D. Multiple genetic abnormalities due to mutations in a single
gene are characteristics of homeotic genes.
2. Answer: D. Specific transcription factors (e.g., any steroid receptor) bind to
specific DNA sequences (enhancers) and to RNA polymerase at a single
promoter sequence and enable the RNA polymerase to transcribe the gene
more efficiently.
3. Answer: A. Acetylation of nucleosome core histones is strongly associated
with transcriptionally active chromatin. Other modifications (choices B, C,
and E) are associated with down regulation of gene expression.
Deamination of cytosine in DNA (choice D) is not related to chromatin
remodeling and increased gene expression.
8

6#
Genetic Strategies in Therapeutics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Understand concept and applications of restriction endonucleases
❏ Answer questions about medical applications of recombinant DNA
RECOMBINANT DNA TECHNOLOGY
Recombinant DNA technology allows a DNA fragment from any source to be
joined in vitro with a nucleic acid vector that can replicate autonomously in
microorganisms. This technology has several functions:
• Provides a means of analyzing and altering genes and proteins
• Provides the reagents necessary for genetic testing for carrier detection
and prenatal diagnosis of genetic diseases and for gene therapy
• Provides a source of a specific protein (e.g., recombinant human insulin)
in almost unlimited quantities
8
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Source DNA Application
DNA to be cloned Cloned DNA
MedicalGenetics
• Very tiny amount Large amount
• Heterogeneous Homogeneous
Plasmids
Cloning vector
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences • Plasmids
Recombinant plasmids Cloned recombinant plasmids
(millions of identical copies)
Bacteria (or other
cloning host)
Lysed
bacteria
Bacteria transformed with
recombinant plasmids
Chemical to lyse bacteria
and release plasmids
Spread plate of Select a colony (clone)
transformed bacteria Grow large quantities
Induce gene
expression
Recombinant proteins
Figure I 6 1. Cloning I 6Rec1o.mbCilnoannitng RecombinDanNtAFigure DNA
The DNA to be cloned is usually present in a small quantity and is part of a
heterogeneous mixture containing other DNA sequences. The goal is to produce a
large quantity of homogeneous DNA for one of the above applications. The general
strategy for cloning DNA and isolating the cloned material can be seen above. The
steps include:
• Ligate the DNA into a piece of nucleic acid (the vector) that can be
autonomously replicated in a living organism. The vector containing the
new DNA is referred to as a recombinant vector.
• Transfer the recombinant vectors into host cells.
NOTE • Grow the host cells in isolated colonies so that each colony contains only
one recombinant vector.
Each cultured colony is a clone; all members
• Select a colony for study.
are genetically identical.
• Grow a large quantity of that colony.
• Lyse the host cells and re isolate the replicated recombinant vectors.
• Remove (by restriction enzyme cutting) the cloned DNA from the vector.
8
CHAPTER 6 | GENETIC STRATEGIES IN THERAPEUTICS
CLONING RESTRICTION FRAGMENTS OF DNA: NOTE
Human Genome Project data can be used to
THE HUMAN GENOME PROJECT
identify:
The Human Genome Project, initiated in 1991, involved the identification of the
entire 3 billion–base pair human DNA sequence. This project has now been • Protein coding genes
completed. Although humans appear to be quite different from each other, the
sequence of our DNA is, in reality, highly conserved. On average, 2 unrelated • Regulatory sequences in noncoding
individuals share over 99.9% of their DNA sequences. For the Human Genome DNA
Project, DNA was obtained from a relatively small number of individuals.
• Polymorphic genetic markers
Although the variety of techniques involved is well beyond this review, the basic
effort required cloning DNA restriction fragments, determining their sequences, (restriction endonuclease sites, short
and identifying overlaps to align the fragments properly. The major points to be tandem repeats, and single nucleotide
understood include: polymorphisms) dispersed throughout
chromosomes in coding and
• Restriction endonucleases cut DNA specifically at palindrome sequences,
noncoding DNA
yielding restriction fragments of chromosomes.
HY HY
• The restriction fragments are cloned in vectors.
MY MY
• The cloned fragments are re isolated from the cloned recombinant vectors.
• The restriction fragments from each clone are sequenced. LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Producing Restriction Fragments:
Restriction Endonucleases MEDIUM YIELD MEDIUM YIELD
Chromosomes obtained from the DNA donors were cut with restriction endo
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
nucleases to produce restriction fragments. These enzymes are isolated from bacte
ria, their natural source. There are many different restriction endonucleases
isolated from a variety of bacteria that are now readily available FUcNomDmAeMrcEiaNllTyA.LS In FUNDAMENTALS
bacteria, they act as part of a restriction/modification system that protects the
bacteria from infection by DNA viruses. REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
Palindromes
Enhancer P gene
Genomic DNA
Digestion with
restriction endonuclease
Enhancer P ge ne
Genomic DNA restriction fragments
Figure IFig6ure2. ID6NA2. DNDAigesDtioignestion wwiitthh a aRestRriecstitorinction EndonucleaEsnedonuclease
8
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Restriction endonucleases recognize double stranded DNA sequences called
palindromes (inverted repeats) usually of 4 to 8 base pairs in length. For example,
Figure I 6 3 shows the recognition site for EcoRI, a restriction endonuclease
isolated from Escherichia coli. A palindrome can be identified by examining the
MedicalGenetics sequence of only one strand. Draw a line through the center of the sequence
(through the central base for palindromes with an odd number of nucleotides). If
the sequence is folded along this line, the bases should pair.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
A palindrome
Top strand 5 ́ 3 ́
DNA sequence recognized by the
restriction endonuclease EcoRI
5 ́ GAA TTC 3 ́
3 ́ CTT AA G 5 ́
Same as bottom strand 5 ́ 3 ́
Figure I 6 3. EcoRI Recognition SeqFuigenucree I 6 3. EcoRI Recognition Sequence
DNA from a source to be cloned is mixed with a particular restriction endonucle
ase, such as EcoRI, producing DNA restriction fragments. Some restriction
endonucleases, such as EcoRI, produce offset cuts within the palindrome, yielding
“sticky ends” on the fragments. Sticky ends are advantageous in facilitating the
recombination of a restriction fragment with the vector DNA.
Sticky Ends
5 ́ GAATTC 3 ́
3 ́ CTTAAG 5 ́
EcoRI
5 ́ G + 5 ́ AATTC 3 ́
3 ́ CTTAA 5 ́ G 5 ́
Figure IFig6ure4. IE6xam4p.leExample ofofaa RReessttrriiccttiioonn EndonEuncldeoanseuclease
8
CHAPTER 6 | GENETIC STRATEGIES IN THERAPEUTICS
Cloning Restriction Fragments Using Vectors
Each restriction fragment (which may include a gene) must be inserted into a
vector to be cloned. A vector is a piece of DNA (plasmid, viral chromosome, yeast
chromosome) capable of autonomous replication in a host cell—for instance, the
plasmid pBR322 shown below. The DNA used as a vector usually has:
• At least one type of palindrome recognized by a restriction endonuclease
• An origin for autonomous replication
• At least one gene for resistance to an antibiotic (allows selection for colonies
with recombinant plasmids)
GAATTC GAATTC
CTTAAG CTTAAG
Human DNA
EcoRI
Tetr
AATTC G GAATTC EcoRI site
G AATTC
G CTTAA CTTAA
G CTTAAG
EcoRI
ori ori
Anneal
ligate
ampr ampr
Plasmid (vector) ampr, tetr
GAATTC
GAATTC
CTTAAG
CTTAA
ori
ampr
Recombinant plasmid ampr
Figure I 6 5. Formation of a Recombinant Plasmid
Figure I 6 5. Formation of a Recombinant Plasmid
87
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Genomic Libraries
Genomic libraries have been used to sequence DNA as accomplished in the
Human Genome Project. These sequences can be used to identify:
MedicalGenetics • Protein coding genes
• Restriction endonuclease sites (see Margin Note: Restriction Maps)
• Other genetic markers (short tandem repeats, single nucleotide
polymorphisms)
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
• Non expressed DNA (enhancers, promoters, introns, noncoding DNA
between gene regions)
CLONING GENES AS cDNA PRODUCED BY REVERSE
TRANSCRIPTION OF CELLULAR mRNA
If the end goal of cloning is to have a cloned gene expressed in a cell, the entire
coding sequence must be cloned intact. Furthermore, if a cloned eukaryotic gene
BRIDGE TO MEDICAL GENETICS
is to be expressed in bacteria (to make recombinant proteins), the gene must not
Restriction Maps
contain introns, which could not be processed in a prokaryotic cell. In these cases,
it is more convenient to clone cDNA rather than DNA restriction fragments.
• Line drawings of DNA identifying sites
cut by restriction endonucleases
• Identify potential RFLP markers for Producing cDNA by Reverse Transcription of mRNA
genetic diagnosis Cytoplasmic mRNA is isolated from a cell known to express the desired gene.
Reverse transcriptase, along with other components (Figure I 6 6), is used
in vitro to produce double stranded cDNA that is subsequently recombined with a
chosen vector to produce the recombinant DNA for cloning. In this approach:
• All genes expressed will be cloned along with the desired gene.
• None of the non expressed DNA in the cell will be cloned.
• Each cDNA represents the complete coding sequence of a gene.
• The cDNAs have no introns.
• An expression library is produced at the end of the cloning procedure.
Genes expressed Genes not
in tissue expressed in tissu
DNA
mRNA
Reverse transcription using
reverse transcriptase and
accessory enzymes
cDNA
Figure I 6 6. Cloning Expressed Genes by Producing cDNAs
Figure I 6 6. Cloning Expressed Genes by Producing cDNAs
88
CHAPTER 6 | GENETIC STRATEGIES IN THERAPEUTICS
cDNA (Expression) Libraries
Once the recombinant expression vectors containing the cDNA inserts are
produced, they are cloned in bacteria (or other host cells) and produce cDNA
(expression) libraries. These libraries can be used to:
• Sequence specific genes and identify disease causing mutations
• Produce recombinant proteins (insulin, factor VIII, HBsAg for
vaccination)
• Conduct gene replacement therapy
• Produce transgenic animals
Several of these applications are discussed in more detail in subsequent sections of
this chapter.
Table I 6 1. Comparison of Genomic and cDNA (Expression) Libraries
Genomic cDNA (Expression)
Libraries Library
Source of DNA Chromosomal mRNA (cDNA)
DNA
Enzymes to make library Restriction Reverse transcrip
endonuclease tase
DNA ligase DNA ligase
Contains nonexpressed Yes No
sequences of chromosomes
Cloned genes are complete Not necessarily Yes
sequences
Cloned genes contain Yes No
introns
Promoter and enhancer Yes, but not No
sequences present necessarily in
same clone
Gene can be expressed in No Yes
cloning host (recombinant
proteins)
Can be used for gene No Yes
therapy or constructing
transgenic animals
MEDICAL APPLICATIONS OF RECOMBINANT DNA
Recombinant DNA can be used as follows:
• To produce recombinant proteins, used variously in:
– Replacement therapy (e.g., insulin in diabetes)
– Disease prevention (e.g., vaccines)
– Diagnostic tests (e.g., monoclonal antibodies)
• To conduct gene therapy in the treatment of genetic diseases
8
Immunology
MY
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY LY
Biochemistry
High Yield H
Recombinant Proteins
Recombinant proteins can be made by cloning the relevant geneMEDfIoUrM the pYrIoEteLiDn in ME
a host organism, growing large quantities of the organism, and inducing it to
LOW YIELD
express the gene (as indicated in the lower right of Figure I 6 1). Many therapeu
MedicalGenetics
tics proteins are now mass produced as recombinant proteins.
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
Table I 6 2. Examples of Protein Products of Recombinant DNA Technology
REINFORCEMENT RE
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Product Produced in Use
Insulin E. coli Diabetes
Growth factor E. coli Growth defects
Epidermal growth factor E. coli Burns, ulcers
Hepatitis B vaccine Saccharomyces Prevention of viral
cerevisiae hepatitis
HY
Erythropoietin Mammalian cells Anemia
MY
Factor VIII Mammalian cells Hemophilia
LY
High Yield H
Gene Therapy
Gene therapy now offers potential cures for individuals with inhMerEitDedIUM disYeaIsEeLs.D ME
The initial goal is to introduce a normal copy of the gene that is defective into the
tissues that give rise to the pathology of the genetic disease. LOW YIELD
For instance, about 50% of children with severe combined immunodeficiency have
a mutation in the gene encoding the γ chain common to several FUoNfDAtMheENTAinLtSerleukin FUN
receptors. Recently, cDNA from a normal γ chain gene was used to transduce
REINFORCEMENT RE
autologous cells from infants with X linked severe combined immunodeficiency
(SCID) with subsequent correction of the defects in their T cells and natural killer
cells.
• Gene transfer requires a delivery vector (retrovirus, adenovirus, liposome).
• Only tissues giving rise to the disease pathology are targeted for gene
therapy.
• The normal gene is not inherited by offspring.
Gene delivery vectors
For gene replacement therapy to be a realistic possibility, efficient gene delivery
vectors must be used to transfer the cloned gene into the target cells’ DNA.
Because viruses naturally infect cells to insert their own genetic material, most
gene delivery vectors now in use are modified viruses. A portion of the viral
genome is replaced with the cloned gene (as either DNA or RNA) such that the
virus can infect but not complete its replication cycle. Steps in the production of a
retrovirus for gene replacement therapy are illustrated in Figure I 6 7.
9
CHAPTER 6 | GENETIC STRATEGIES IN THERAPEUTICS
Retroviruses and adenoviruses were early vectors used in gene delivery. However,
newer strategies take advantage of vectors with better properties, such as adeno
associated viruses (AAV). Major advantages of AAV include having no disease
association in humans and limited innate immunity. In addition, AAV restricts
expression to specific tissues: A tissue specific promoter in the AAV is genetically
engineered to control transcription of the inserted transgene.
Table I 6 3. Vectors Used in Gene Therapy
Adeno Associated
Viral Vector Retroviruses Adenovirus Virus (AAV)
Family Retroviridae Adenoviridae Parvoviridae
Genome ssRNA dsDNA ssDNA
Disease Yes Yes No
association?
Inserts into Yes No No (episomal)
chromosome?
Innate immunity? Yes Yes Limited
Retrovirus
Therapeutic
human gene
Retroviral genes are replaced with
therapeutic human gene, making the
retrovirus incapable of self replication
Package modified retroviral genome in
host packaging cell
Multiple virions, carrying
the retrovirus, are produced
Virions
Figure I 6 7. Preparation of a Retrovirus
Figure I 6 7. Preparation of a Retrovirus for Gene Replacement Therapy
for Gene Replacement Therapy
9
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
NOTE There are 2 strategies for delivering a therapeutic gene (transgene) into an
individual.
• Ex vivo: cells modified outside the
body, then transplanted back in • In vivo gene replacement therapy involves the direct delivery of a thera
MedicalGenetics peutic gene into a patient’s body. Upon entry into the target cells, the
• In vivo: gene changed in cells still in
inserted transgene is expressed into a therapeutic protein.
body
• Ex vivo gene replacement therapy involves the genetic manipulation of a
patient’s target cells outside the body. Target cells are infected with a
recombinant virus harboring the therapeutic transgene. The genetically
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
modified target cells, harboring and expressing the therapeutic protein,
are then reintroduced into the same patient.
Cloned therapeutic transgene
inserted into viral delivery
In Vivo Therapy Ex Vivo Therapy
(Direct Delivery) vehicle (Cell Based Delivery)
Cells to be
Target organ
Target cells infected genetically modified
(e.g., liver)
with recombinant (e.g., stem cells)
virus and integrated
into host chromosome
Target cells modified by
transgene containing
virus
Genetically modified
cells into patient
Figure I 6 8. In Vivo and Ex Vivo Gene Replacement Therapies
Figure I 6 8. In Vivo and Ex Vivo Gene Replacement Therapies
9
CHAPTER 6 | GENETIC STRATEGIES IN THERAPEUTICS
Gene replacement therapy (in vivo therapy) for cystic fibrosis illustrates an
important example of direct delivery of a transgene.
Cloned therapeutic transgene
inserted into viral delivery
vehicle (AAV)
Bacterial cloning AAV containing
of human therapeutic
therapeutic gene transgene nasally
dripped into lung
AAV containing
therapeutic transgene
enters lung cell nucleus
Nucleus
Lung cell
Therapeutic transgene
integrated into lung cell
chromosomes
Therapeutic transgene corrects
genetic defect
Figure I 6 9. Gene Replacement Therapy for Cystic Fibrosis
Figure I 6 9. Gene Replacement Therapy for Cystic Fibrosis
9
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
An important example of ex vivo gene replacement therapy is illustrated below.
Retrovirus with cloned
MedicalGenetics ADA gene
T cells
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Culture with growth factors
Infuse modified cells into patient
Figure I 6 10. Ex Vivo Gene Replacement Therapy for XLinked Severe Combined Immunodeficiency
Figure I 6 10. Ex Vivo Gene Replacement Therapy for
X Linked Severe Combined Immunodeficiency
Remaining challenges to gene replacement therapy
Although much progress has been made in gene replacement therapy, significant
challenges still remain. These challenges include:
• Targeting the therapeutic gene to the appropriate tissues
• Low level or transient expression of the therapeutic gene
• Problems caused by random insertion of the therapeutic gene into the host
DNA.
Recall Question
Which of the following is true for both genomic libraries and cDNA
(expression) libraries?
A. Cloned genes contain introns
B. DNA ligase is used
C. Reverse transcriptase is used
D. Can be used for gene therapy
Answer: B
9
CHAPTER 6 | GENETIC STRATEGIES IN THERAPEUTICS
RNA Interference
RNA interference (RNAi) refers to downregulation of gene expression through the
use of small RNA molecules, which mediate gene expression by either inhibiting
translation or causing premature degradation of the genes’ mRNAs. Two types of
small RNA molecules are involved in RNA interference: microRNA (miRNA) and
small interfering RNA (siRNA). The RNAi pathway occurs in many eukaryotes,
including humans, and plays a central role in defending cells against viruses and
transposons (discussed in Microbiology Lecture Notes).
The RNAi process begins when an enzyme known as dicer cleaves long double
stranded RNA into small double stranded RNA fragments (siRNA) approximately
20 nucleotides in length. The double stranded siRNA then unwinds into two
single stranded RNAs: the passenger strand (sense strand), which subsequently
degrades, and the guide strand (antisense strand), which associates into the
RNA induced silencing complex (RISC). Next, the guide strand pairs with a
complementary sequence in a messenger RNA molecule and induces cleavage
using argonaute, the catalytic component of the RISC complex. Since the mRNA is
degraded, its encoded protein is not produced. The result is posttranscriptional
gene silencing. This effect is often referred to as “knockdown” because gene
expression continues, though in greatly reduced extent. In “knockout,” by contrast,
gene expression is entirely absent.
dsRNA
Dicer
siRNA
Attachment of RISC to the
“anti sense” RNA strand
Degradation of the
“sense” RNA strand
mRNA
Degradation
of mRNA
Figure I 6 11. RNAi Pathway
Figure I 6 11. RNAi Pathway
9
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
To time limit the effects of RNAi, siRNAs can be administered as stabilized RNAs
conjugated to targeting compounds or enclosed in lipid vesicles. A single RNAi
treatment can silence expression of a particular gene for 2 weeks. siRNAs can be
stabilized against endogenous RNases in blood or cells by modifying the 2’
MedicalGenetics hydroxyl with a methyl or fluorine group.
RNA interference technology is being explored as a treatment for cancer and many
neurodegenerative diseases and for use in antiviral therapies. Clinical trials are
also exploring the use of RNAi in other clinical applications, such as therapy for
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences age related macular degeneration.
Table I 6 4. Summary of Important Points About Recombinant DNA
Restriction Recognize palindromes in dsDNA:
endonucleases
5′ - - - G A A T T C - - - 3′
3′ - - - C T T A A G - - - 5′
Cut leaving sticky ends:
5′ - - - G A A T T C - - - 3′
3′ - - - C T T A A G - - - 5′
Used to make restriction maps of DNA
Produce fragments for genetic analysis
Produce fragments for making recombinant DNA and
cloning DNA sequences
Vectors for Plasmid:
recombinant
• Restriction site
DNA and
• Replication origin
cloning
• Resistance to antibiotic(s)
Expression vector also requires:
• Promoter
• Shine Dalgarno sequence
Other vectors: phage, YACs
Approaches to Genomic DNA
cloning DNA
• Restriction endonucleases fragment DNA
• Total nuclear DNA cloned
• Genes contain introns
cDNA
• Reverse transcription of mRNAs from cell
• Genes expressed cloned
• Genes have no introns
Uses of cloned Produce recombinant proteins
genes
Gene therapy (somatic)
Transgenic animals (germline)
Produce cDNA probes for blots
9
CHAPTER 6 | GENETIC STRATEGIES IN THERAPEUTICS
Review Questions
Select the ONE best answer.
1. If a patient with cystic fibrosis were to be treated by gene therapy, which
type of cells should be targeted as host cells?
A. Germ cells
B. Epithelial cells
C. T cells
D. Hemopoietic stem cells
2. A pharmaceutical firm is interested in the bacterial production of thymi
dylate synthase in large quantities for drug targeting studies. An important
step in the overall cloning strategy involves the ligation of synthase cDNA
into a plasmid vector containing a replication origin, an antibiotic resis
tance gene, and a promoter sequence. Which additional nucleotide
sequence should be included in this vector to ensure optimal production of
the thymidylate synthase?
A. Operator sequence
B. PolyA sequence
C. Shine Dalgarno sequence
D. Attenuator sequence
E. 3′ splice acceptor sequence
3. Restriction fragment length polymorphisms may be produced by mutations
in the sites for restriction endonucleases. For instance, a single base change
in the site for the nuclear SalI produces the sequence GTGGAC, which can
no longer be recognized by the enzyme. What was the original sequence
recognized by SalI?
A. GTAGAC
B. GCGGAC
C. CTGGAC
D. GTCGAC
E. GTGTAC
9
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Answers
1. Answer: B. The pathogenesis of cystic fibrosis is related to defective chloride
transport in epithelial cells.
MedicalGenetics
2. Answer: C. Incorporation of a Shine Dalgarno sequence into the expres
sion vector will promote ribosome binding to the translation start site on
the mRNA produced by transcription of the cDNA insert.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences 3. Answer: D. All options represent single base changes in the mutant
sequence in the stem, but only choice D reestablishes a palindrome.
9
7
Techniques of Genetic Analysis
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Interpret scenarios about blotting technique
❏ Explain information related to polymerase chain reaction
Techniques of genetic analysis are assuming an increasingly larger role in medical
diagnosis. These techniques, which once were a specialized part of medical
genetics, are now becoming essential tools for every physician to understand.
Blotting techniques allow testing for genetic diseases, gene expression profiling,
and routine testing for antigens and antibodies. The polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) is now an essential tool in many aspects of genetic testing, forensic
medicine, and paternity testing. These techniques are discussed in this chapter,
but their applications will be further explored in Medical Genetics (Section II of
this book).
BLOTTING TECHNIQUES
Blotting techniques have been developed to detect and visualize specific DNA,
RNA, and protein among complex mixtures of contaminating molecules. These
techniques have allowed the identification and characterization of the genes
involved in numerous inherited diseases.
Add probe Visualize
to reveal bands
Transfer to bands of (autoradio
membrane interest graphy)
Material separated Material on blot Solid lines Only the bands
by gel electrophoresis represent bands reactive with probes
reactive with probe are made visible
Figure I 7 1. Blotting TFeigcuhrneique I 7 1. Blotting Technique
The fragments in the material to be analyzed (DNA, RNA, or protein) are
separated by gel electrophoresis. The smaller molecules travel faster and appear
nearer the bottom of the gel. The bands of material in the gel are transferred, or
blotted, to the surface of a membrane. The membrane is incubated with a (usually
radioactive) labeled probe that will specifically bind to the molecules of interest.
Visualization of the labeled probe (usually by autoradiography) will reveal which
band(s) interacted with the probe.
99
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
The most common types of blots are compared below. Most typically, DNA
restriction fragments are analyzed on a Southern blot.
Table I 7 1. Types of Blots
MedicalGenetics
Electro
Material phoresis
Blot Type Analyzed Required Probe Used Purpose
Southern DNA Yes 32P DNA To determine which
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
restriction frag
ments of DNA are
associated with a
particular gene
Northern RNA Yes 32P DNA To measure sizes
and amounts of
specific mRNA
molecules to
answer questions
about gene
expression
Western Protein Yes 125I or To measure amount
enzyme of antigen (pro
linked teins) or antibody
antibody
Dot (slot) RNA, No Same as To detect specific
(Figure DNA, or for blots DNA, RNA, protein,
II 6 1) protein above or antibod
Probes
DNA probes are radioactively labeled single stranded DNA molecules that are able
to specifically hybridize (anneal) to particular denatured DNA sequences. Examples
include:
• Probes that bind to part of a specific gene region; often produced by
cloning cDNA transcribed from the gene and labeling it with 32P,
a radioactive isotope of phosphorus
• Probes that bind to markers known to be in close proximity (closely
linked) to a gene
• Probes that bind specifically to a single allele of a gene—allele specific
oligonucleotide (ASO) probes
When protein is separated and analyzed on a Western blot, 125I labeled antibody
specific for the protein of interest is used as a probe.
The probe is an important part of analyzing any blot because the only bands that
will appear on the final autoradiogram are those to which the probe has hybridized
(see figure below).
DNA probes are used to selectively detect DNA fragments. Staining with ethidium
bromide can be used to visualize and detect all DNA fragments in a gel, provided
the fragments are present in sufficient quantities. Ethidium bromide intercalates
between stacked bases and fluoresces when exposed to UV light.
100
MY MY
LY CHAPTER 7 | TECHNIQUES LYOF GENETIC ANALYSIS
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Southern Blots and Restriction Fragment
Length Polymorphisms (RFLPs) MEDIUM YIELD MEDIUM YIELD
Although unrelated individuals share over 99.9% of their DNA sequences, the fact
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
that the human genome contains over 3 billion base pairs means that 2 unrelated
individuals’ DNA will differ at over a million base pairs (0.1% of a billion equals a
million). These differences include mutations in restriction endonuFcUleNasDeAMENTALS sites that FUNDAMENTALS
can be analyzed as RFLPs on Southern blots.
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
1.2 kB 0.9 kB
EcoR1 EcoR1 EcoR1
A GAATTC GAATTC GAATTC
EcoR1 EcoR1
PROBE
B GAATTC GAGTTC GAATTC
Only one blot below correctly corresponds to the
QUESTION:
genotypes displayed. Which blot is correct?
2.1 kB 2.1 kB
1.2 kB 1.2 kB
0.9 kB 0.9 kB
0.6 kB 0.6 kB
AA AB BB AA AB BB
Figure I 7 2. Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism
Figure I 7 2. Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism Analysis
Analysis on a Southern Blot
on a Southern Blot
Apair of homologous chromosomes is shown above. They are designated chromosomes Aand B.
The figure shows the same region on both chromosomes and identifies sites (GAATTC) cut by the
restriction endonuclease EcoR1. The probe used on the Southern blot binds to the area of the
chromosomes indicated in the diagram. DNA samples from 3 individuals are tested: AA
(homozygous for Aat this region), AB (heterozygous at this region), and BB (homozygous for Bat
this region). At the bottom, the figure also presents 2 blots, only one of which correctly represents
the results seen on the autoradiogram. Which blot is correct?
(Answer: The blot on the right is correct.)
10
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Repetitive sequences known as VNTRs (variable number of tandem repeats) make
some contribution to RFLPs, predominantly in the centromeric and telomeric
regions of chromosomes (see margin note: VNTR Sequences and RFLP).
MedicalGenetics
RFLPs and genetic testing
NOTE RFLPs may be used in genetic testing to infer the presence of a disease causing
allele of a gene in a family with a genetic disease. If chromosome A in a family also
VNTR Sequences and RFLP
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences carried a disease producing allele of a gene in this region and chromosome B
Variable number of tandem repeat (VNTR) carried a normal allele, finding a 1.2 kilobase (kb) band would indicate that the
disease producing allele was also present (both characteristics of chromosome A).
sequences contribute to some restriction
Conversely, finding a 2.1 kb fragment would indicate that the normal allele of the
fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs). A
gene was present (both characteristics of chromosome B). This type of genetic
VNTR sequence designates a unit of
analysis is more fully discussed in the Medical Genetics section, Chapter 6.
nucleotides usually between 15 and 60 bp
A simple example is illustrated by the following case.
that is repeated in tandem multiple times at
a particular location in the DNA. Although
Aphenotypically normal man and woman have an 8 year old son with sickle cell anemia. They
the repeated sequence is shared by all also have a 5 year old daughter who does not have sickle cell anemia but has not been tested
individuals, the number of repeated units is for carrier status. The mother is in her 16th week of pregnancy and wishes to know whether the
variable from person to person. fetus that she is carrying will develop sickle cell disease. The mutation causing sickle cell anemia
(G6V) also destroys a restriction site for the restriction endonuclease MstII. DNA from each of the
These VNTR sequences (boxes) can be family members is cut with MstII, Southern blotted, and probed with a 32P labeled cDNA probe
flanked by restriction endonuclease sites for the 5′UTR of the β globin gene. The results are shown below, along with the family pedigree.
(arrows). The probe used to detect the RFLP What is the best conclusion about the fetus?
would bind to the repeated unit.
MstII Restriction Map of the β Globin Gene
Normal (A) 5 ́ 3 ́
1.15kb 0.2 kb
Sickle (S) 5 ́ 3 ́
1.35kb
Pedigree Analysis
Fetus
1.35 kB
1.15 kB
Figure FigIur7e 3.I R7FL3P. RFLPDiaDgniaogsnisosis ofofSicSklieckle Cell CDelilseaseDisease
(Answer: Fetus is heterozygous, or a carrier, for the mutation.)
10
CHAPTER 7 | TECHNIQUES OF GENETIC ANALYSIS
HY HY
Both the mother and the father have the same size restriction fragments marking
the chromosome with the sickle allele. Because they are genetically unrelated, MY MY
coming from different families this is not always the case. Additional examples will
be discussed in Medical Genetics. LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Northern Blots
Northern blots analyze RNA extracted from a tissue and are typMicaEllDyIUM usedYIELDto MEDIUM YIELD
determine which genes are being expressed. One example is shown below. The goal
is to determine which tissues express the FMR1 gene involved in fragileLOW XYIsEyLnD LOW YIELD
drome. RNA samples from multiple tissues have been separated by electrophoresis,
blotted, and probed with a 32P cDNA probe from the FMR1 gene. The results are
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
consistent with high level expression (a 4.4 kb transcript) of this gene in brain and
testis and lower level expression in the lung. In the heart, the geneREINFisORaClEsoMENTex REINFORCEMENT
pressed, but the transcripts are only 1.4 kb long. Variability in the lengths of the
mRNAs transcribed from a single gene may be the result of alternative splicing as
discussed in Chapter 3, Transcription and RNA Processing.
Skeletal CLINICAL CORRELATE
muscle Brain Liver Testes Lung Pancreas Heart Fragile X Syndrome
Fragile X syndrome is the leading known
4.4 kb
cause of inherited intellectual disability.
Other symptoms include large ears,
elongated face, hypermobile joints, and
macroorchidism in postpubertal males. The
gene involved, FMR1, maps to the long arm
of the X chromosome. See Section II,
Chapter 1, for a further discussion of this
single gene disorder.
1.4 kb
Figure FigureI 7I4.7 4N.orNthoerrthnern BBloltot to tDoeterDmeinteermine Pattern PaottfernFMR1 EoxfpresFsMionR1 Expression
Gene expression profiling (microarrays)
It is now possible to embed probes for many different mRNA in a multi well gel or
even on a chip to simultaneously determine whether hundreds of genes are
expressed in a particular tissue. This is referred to as gene expression profiling or
microarray analysis. For example, previous research has suggested that cells from a
breast cancer express a variety of genes that are either not expressed or expressed
only at a low level in normal cells. Probes for the corresponding mRNAs can be
embedded on a solid support and total mRNA from a particular woman’s breast
tumor tested with each probe. The pattern of gene expression (gene expression
profiling) may give information about the prognosis for that particular woman,
aiding in making choices about the appropriate treatment protocol.
10
Immunology
MY
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY LY
Biochemistry
High Yield H
Western Blots
Western blots separate proteins by gel electrophoresis and use M12E5DIIUMlabeled YIELpDrobe ME
antibodies to detect the proteins (antigens). For this reason, Western blots are also
LOW YIELD
referred to as immunoblots.
MedicalGenetics
One important application of Western blotting is to detect the presence of
antibodies to the HIV virus in HIV testing (see Immunology LecFtuUrNeDAMENNToAteLsS). FUN
Western blots may also be used to identify whether a particular protein is in a cell
REINFORCEMENT RE
and therefore represent a way to test for gene expression at the level of translation.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
POLYMERASE CHAIN REACTION (PCR)
NOTE The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a technique in which a selected region of a
chromosome can be amplified more than a million fold within a few hours. The
The PCR can be used for:
technique allows extremely small samples of DNA to be used for further testing.
• Comparing DNA samples in forensic The PCR has many applications.
cases
The region of a chromosome to be amplified by a PCR is referred to as the target
• Paternity testing sequence and may be an area containing a suspected mutation, a short tandem
repeat (STR, or microsatellite sequence), or really any area of interest. The major
• Direct mutation testing
constraint in performing a PCR is that one must know the nucleotide sequence
bordering (flanking) the target region at each of its 3′ ends. This is no longer an
• Diagnosing bacterial and viral
obstacle because of the sequence data from the Human Genome Project.
infections
The steps of the PCR include the following:
• HIV testing when antibody tests are
uninformative (importantly, infants • Add the sample containing DNA to be amplified.
whose mothers are HIV positive)
• Add excess amounts of primers complementary to both 3′ flanks of the
target sequence. This selects the region to be amplified.
NOTE • Add a heat stable DNA polymerase (Taq DNA polymerase) and deoxyri
bonucleotides (dNTPs) for DNA synthesis.
Short tandem repeats (STRs, or
microsatellites) are repeats of a di to • Heat the sample to melt the DNA (convert dsDNA to ssDNA).
tetranucleotide sequence. They are useful in • Cool the sample to re anneal the DNA. Because the ratio of primers to
genetic testing. complementary strands is extremely high, primers bind at the 3′ flanking
regions.
• Occur both in the spacer regions
• Heat the sample to increase the activity of the Taq DNA polymerase.
between genes and within gene
Primer elongation occurs, and new complementary strands are
regions
synthesized.
• In noncoding regions, show some
This process is repeated for approximately 20 cycles, producing over a million
variability in length as mutations have
double stranded copies of the target sequence.
expanded or contracted the number of
repeats throughout evolution
• Have known positions that are
documented in chromosome maps
10
CHAPTER 7 | TECHNIQUES OF GENETIC ANALYSIS
Region of DNA to be amplified
Strand 1 3 ́ 5 ́
Strand 2 5 ́ 3 ́
• Add primers.
Cycle 1 • Heat to separate strands.
• Cool to allow primer template hybridization.
Strand 1 3 ́ Strand 2 5 ́
Add heat stable DNA polymerase.
Strand 1 3 ́ 5 ́
5 ́ Strand 2 5 ́
Cycle 2 Heat and cool (with primers and
DNA polymerase present).
Strand 1 3 ́
Strand 2 5 ́
Strand 1 3 ́
Strand 2 5 ́
Cycle 3 Repeat heating and cooling cycle.
Strand 1 3 ́
Strand 2 5 ́
Multiple heating and cooling cycles.
Cycles 4 to 20
Present in about 106 copies
Figure IFig7ure5. IPo7lym5e.raPseolymerase CChhaainin ReaRcteioanction
10
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Agarose gel electrophoresis of PCR products
If the known mutation changes the length of the gene (e.g., microsatellite repeats),
this difference can be detected in the PCR amplified DNA by electrophoresis on
agarose gel.
MedicalGenetics
A59 year old man with increasing clumsiness, loss of balance, and irregular tremor and jerkiness
in both arms seeks medical attention. The physician also notes impaired visual tracking. The
patient has one sister, age 53. His father and mother died in a car accident at ages 45 and 43,
respectively. There is no known history of neurologic dysfunction in his family. He takes a multiple
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
vitamin tablet daily but no prescription drugs or supplements. MRI reveals visible atrophy of the
caudate and total basal ganglia, and a tentative diagnosis of Huntington disease is made. To
confirm the diagnosis, a sample of blood is sent for molecular genetic testing. PCR amplification
is carried out on a region on 4p16.3 suspected to contain a mutation. The results are shown
below, along with results from a normal, healthy, age matched control. Is this result consistent
with the diagnosis?
Patient Control
170 bp
104 bp
101 bp
95 bp
FigFuigreure I 7 6I. 7Dire6c.t DGireecntetic DGieangentiocsis ofDiaNgenuorsoisdegenerative of
Neurodegenerative Disease DUissienagse PCR Using PCR
(Answer: Yes, the results are consistent with Huntington disease. In comparison with the normal
control PCR products, one of the patient’s PCR products (170 bp) is well out of the normal range.
This is consistent with a triplet repeat expansion in that allele of the huntingtin gene. The
2 bands from the control are 95 base pairs and 101 base pairs, a difference of 2 triplet repeats.
The patient sample shows a 104 base pair band, a difference of one triplet repeat from the
larger control band. Significantly, there is a difference of 69 base pairs between the patient’s
2 bands: 104 base pairs versus 170 base pairs. This is equivalent to 23 triplet repeats.)
10
CHAPTER 7 | TECHNIQUES OF GENETIC ANALYSIS
Recall Question
Which of the following is an application of cDNA libraries rather
than PCR technique?
A. Comparing DNA
B. Diagnosing specific viral infections
HY HY
C. Producing transgenic animals
MY MY
D. Paternity testing
LY LY
Answer: C
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Genetic Fingerprinting Using PCR
Amplification of Microsatellite Sequences MEDIUM YIELD MEDIUM YIELD
Most repetitive sequences are not in coding regions. Because expansion of these
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
sequences in spacer DNA rarely affects any function, they become highly polymorphic
in the population and can be used to develop a genetic fingerprint. Such fingerprints
are important in paternity testing and forensic medicine. Very smallFUNDsAamMpEleNsTALS contain FUNDAMENTALS
ing dried tissue can be analyzed by this technique. PCR amplification of repetitive
sequences such as VNTR and STR sequences can be used for genetic REINfFinOgRerCpEriMntiEnNg.T REINFORCEMENT
Paternity testing using PCR amplification
of microsatellite sequences
Although microsatellite sequences are distributed throughout the DNA, a single
region may be selectively amplified by using primers that overlap the 3′ flanking
regions adjacent to the repeat analyzed. Such primers amplify “single locus”
sequences, which are highly polymorphic within the population. Because humans
have pairs of chromosomes, each individual will have a maximum of 2 bands, one
from the father and one from the mother.
For instance, in the figure below, are the tested males in case 1 and case 2 the
fathers of the children?
Male Male
Tested Mother Tested Mothe
Child Child
CASE 1 CASE 2
Figure I7 7. Paternity Testing
Figure I 7 7. Paternity Testing
107
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
The approach should be as follows:
• Identify the child’s band in common with the mother. The other band
must be from the father.
MedicalGenetics • See if the tested male has a band matching the band from the child. Draw
a conclusion.
Case 1: The tested male in case 1 may be the father, as he shares a band with the
child. We cannot be certain, however, because many other men in the population
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
could have this same band. Matches are required at several different loci to
indicate with high probability that a tested male is the father.
Case 2: The tested male in case 2 cannot be the father, as neither of his bands is
shared with the child.
In practice, 9–10 different polymorphisms are necessary to indicate a match.
PCR in Direct Mutation Testing
If the mutation(s) causing a specific disease is known, the loci involved can be
amplified with a PCR and further analyzed to determine whether the mutation(s)
is present. Mutations causing a length difference can be detected by gel electropho
resis as a length difference in the PCR product. Mutations causing a sequence
difference can be detected by testing the PCR products with ASOs.
Sequencing DNA for direct mutation testing
NOTE If a mutation has been mapped to a particular region of a chromosome, one can
Comparison of dATP and ddATP use the PCR to amplify the region and sequence one of the 2 strands to determine
whether it harbors a mutation. Double stranded DNA is used along with many
copies of a primer that binds only to one strand (often the coding strand).
dATP
NH2
• A sample of the DNA to be sequenced is put in each of 4 reaction mixtures
N
N containing a DNA polymerase and all the necessary deoxyribonucleotide
O O O
HO PP OO P O N N triphosphates (dNTPs) required to synthesize new DNA.
O
OH OH OH • In each test tube a different dideoxynucleotide triphosphate (ddNTP)
which lack both the 3′ and 2′ hydroxyl groups is added. The ddNTPs can
HO
be inserted into a growing chain of DNA, but then any subsequent
ddATP elongation is stopped.
NH2
• The pieces of newly synthesized DNA in each tube are separated by gel
N
N
O O O electrophoresis in a different lane of the gel.
HO PP OO P O N N
O • The sequence of the new strand can be read from the smallest to the
OH OH OH
largest fragments on the gel, e.g., from the bottom to the top.
10
CHAPTER 7 | TECHNIQUES OF GENETIC ANALYSIS
• DNA sample to be sequenced
• Excess primers
• dNTPs
• DNA polymerase
ddATP ddCTP ddGTP ddTTP
Figure FigureI 7I 87.8.DNDANA SeSqeuqeunecnicnigng
The sequence of the newly synthesized DNA strand in this example is 5′CTTG
GAACTGTA 3′.
If one wants the sequence of the original strand, serving as the template in the
sequencing procedure, it would be complementary and anti parallel to the
sequence read from the gel. In this example the original strand sequence would be
5′TACAGTTCCAAG 3′.
PCR in HIV Testing
The enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) is used to screen individuals
for antibodies to the HIV virus. The test has high sensitivity but somewhat lower
specificity. A positive result in an ELISA must be confirmed by a Western blot for
antibodies that are reactive with specific HIV protein antigens (see Immunology
Lecture Notes).
In certain instances, ELISA/Western blot is not useful and PCR is the test of choice
to detect HIV infection.
• PCR is designed to test for the integrated proviral genome, not for anti
bodies to HIV protein antigens.
• Primers that are specific for the HIV provirus are used for the PCR.
• If the person is infected, the proviral genome will be amplified and
detected. If the person is not infected, there will be no PCR product
detected.
10
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
A PCR for the HIV provirus has 2 important advantages over the ELISA/Western
blot:
• Is positive much earlier after infection
MedicalGenetics • Does not rely on an antibody response by the individual
Important situations in which the PCR is currently used include HIV testing in
newborns whose mothers are HIV positive (will always be positive in ELISA/
Western blot) and early testing after known exposure to HIV positive blood
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
(e.g., needlesticks) or other fluids/tissue.
CLINICAL CORRELATE Reverse Transcriptase PCR (RT PCR)
In chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), the An RT PCR detects and can quantify a specific RNA rather than DNA in a sample.
presence of the Philadelphia chromosome This test is useful for detecting RNA viruses such as HIV and coronaviruses, and in
situations similar to the Northern blot, determining whether a gene is transcribed.
translocation (t[9;22]) produces a
BCR ABL, an abnormal fusion protein with
tyrosine kinase activity. It has been shown Measuring viral load in AIDS patients
that monitoring the level of BCR ABL mRNA The RT PCR is used to measure the concentration of active circulating virus in the
with an RT PCR in CML patients during blood of an AIDS patient (viral load). In this way, the test can be used to monitor
therapy with Imatinib (a tyrosine kinase the status of infection and the infection’s response to antiviral drugs.
inhibitor) is helpful for both prognosis and
Figure I 7 9A shows the steps involved. A blood sample from an HIV infected
management of therapy. individual is obtained and, after appropriate preparation, is treated with reverse
transcriptase to produce cDNA from any RNA in the sample. The cDNA is
subsequently PCR amplified using primers specific for the end sequences of the
HIV cDNA. The amplified product is quantitated and, with the use of a standard
curve (Figure I 7 9B), can be related to the original amount of HIV RNA present.
PCR with
primers
Reverse specific for
transcriptase HIV cDNA
cDNAs reverse PCR amplified
RNA in blood
transcribed from RNA cDNA from HIV
sample
in blood sample in blood sample
A
amplified
produc
of
AmounPtCR
Concentration of HIV RNA
in original sample (copies/ml)
B
Figure I 7 9. Quantifying Viral Load in HIV Infection Using a Reverse Transcriptase PCR (RT PCR)
Figure I 7 9. Quantifying Viral Load in HIV Infection Using a Reverse Transcriptase PCR (RT PCR).
(A) RT PCR technique (B) Standard curve for quantifying HIV RNA in blood sample
(A) RT PCR technique. (B) Standard curve for quantifying HIV RNA in blood sample.
110
CHAPTER 7 | TECHNIQUES OF GENETIC ANALYSIS
Review Questions
Select the ONE best answer.
1. Two sets of parents were friends in a small town and had babies on the
same day. The wristbands of the two similar looking infants (A and B) were
inadvertently mixed at the pediatric care unit. In order to accurately identi
fy the parents of the respective infants, PCR analysis was performed on
samples of blood taken from the two infants and both sets of parents
(Father 1 and Mother 1 versus Father 2 and Mother 2). Shown below is the
analysis of the PCR products by gel electrophoresis.
Parents 1 Parents 2
F1 M1 A B M2 F2
What is the best conclusion from the analysis?
A. A is the child of Parents 1.
B. A is the child of Parents 2.
C. B is the child of Parents 1.
D. Father 1 (F1) could be the father of both infants.
E. (Father 2 (F2) could be the father of both infants.
2. Paternal relationship between a man and infant can be best determined by
the technique commonly referred to as DNA fingerprinting. Which of the
following sequences is most conveniently analyzed in a DNA fingerprint?
A. Histocompatibility loci
B. Centromeres
C. Microsatellite tandem repeats (STRs)
D. Restriction enzyme sites
E. Single copy sequences
11
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
3. Sickle cell anemia is caused by a missense mutation in codon 6 of the
β globin gene.
Codon number
MedicalGenetics
5 6 7 8
Normal allele CCTGAGGAGAAG
Mutant allele CCTGTGGAGAAG
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
A man with sickle cell disease and his phenotypically normal wife request
genetic testing because they are concerned about the risk for their unborn
child. DNA samples from the man and the woman and from fetal cells
obtained by amniocentesis are analyzed using the PCR to amplify exon 1 of
the β globin gene. Which 12 base nucleotide sequence was most likely
used as a specific probe complementary to the coding strand of the sickle
cell allele?
A. CCTCACCTCAGG
B. CCTGTGGAGAAG
C. GGACACCTCTTC
D. CTTCTCCACAGG
E. CTTCTCCTCAGG
4. mRNA encoding glucose 6 phosphatase was isolated from baboon liver and
used to make a 32P cDNA probe. DNA was then isolated from marmoset
and from human tissue, digested with a restriction endonuclease, Southern
blotted, and probed with the 32P cDNA. Which of the following conclusions
can be drawn from the results of this analysis shown below?
Marmoset Human
DNA DNA
A. The glucose 6 phosphatase gene is present in baboon, marmoset and
human liver.
B. Both marmoset and human liver express the glucose 6 phosphatase gene.
C. There are two glucose 6 phosphatase genes in the human liver.
D. The glucose 6 phosphatase gene is on different chromosomes in the
marmoset and in the human.
E. The human and marmoset tissue used in this experiment is from liver.
11
CHAPTER 7 | TECHNIQUES OF GENETIC ANALYSIS
5. A couple seeks genetic counseling because both the man and the woman
(unrelated to each other) are carriers of a mutation causing β thalassemia,
an autosomal recessive condition. The couple has one son who is phenotyp
ically normal and has been shown by DNA analysis to be homozygous for
the normal allele. They wish to know whether the fetus in the current preg
nancy will have β thalassemia. Using a probe for the β globin gene that
detects a BamHI RFLP, the following results are obtained. What is the best
conclusion about the fetus?
Fetus
A. The fetus has inherited the mutation from both parents.
B. The fetus has inherited the mutation from the mother but not from the
father.
C. The fetus has inherited the mutation from the father but not from the
mother.
D. The fetus has not inherited the mutation from either parent.
E. The results are inconclusive.
11
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Answers
1. Answer: A. Among the conclusions offered, only choice A is consistent
with the results on the blot. Infant A’s pattern shows a PCR product (lower
MedicalGenetics on the blot) matching F1 and another PCR product (higher on the blot)
matching M1. Neither of infant A’s PCR products match F2 (choices B and
E). The upper PCR product in infant B’s pattern does not match with either
F1 or M1 (choices C and D). Although unlikely given the situation, another
possibility is consistent with the blot. Infant A could be the child of M2 and
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
F1, although this is not offered as an option.
2. Answer: C. STR sequences are amplified using a PCR and analyzed by gel
electrophoresis. Although RFLP analysis could potentially be used for this
purpose, it is not the method of choice.
3. Answer: D. The complementary probe will be antiparallel to the coding
strand of the mutant allele, with all sequences written 5′ → 3′.
4. Answer: A. All 3 tissues contain the gene (the probe was produced from
baboon mRNA, implying the gene is also there).
5. Answer: C. Knowing the son is homozygous for the normal allele, one can
conclude that the two restriction fragments shown in his pattern derived
from chromosomes without the mutation. It is also clear that the upper
(larger) fragment came from his mother’s chromosome and the lower
(smaller) fragment came from his father’s chromosome. The fetus has the
fragment from his mother’s normal chromosome. The other fragment (top
one on the blot) must have come from the father’s chromosome with the
mutation. The fetus therefore is heterozygous for the mutation and the nor
mal allele of the β globin gene.
11
Amino Acids, Proteins,
8
and Enzymes
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Explain information related to amino acids
❏ Answer questions about protein turnover and amino acid nutrition
❏ Understand fundamental concepts of enzyme kinetics
AMINO ACIDS
General Structure
All amino acids have a central carbon atom attached to a carboxyl group, an amino COOH
group, and a hydrogen atom. The amino acids differ from one another only HYin the
HY CH
H2N
chemical nature of the side chain (R).
MY MYR
There are hundreds of amino acids in nature, but only 20 are used as building
blocks of proteins in humans. LY Figure I 8 1. Generalize L d Y Structure
Figure I 8 1. Generalized Structure of
of Amino Acids
Amino Acids
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Classification
The amino acids can be classified as hydrophobic or hydrophilic, MEDIUdeMpending YIELD on the MEDIUM YIELD
ease with which their side chains interact with water. In general, proteins fold so
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
that amino acids with hydrophobic side chains are in the interior of the molecule
where they are protected from water, while those with hydrophilic side chains are
on the surface.
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
Hydrophobic amino acids
• Phenylalanine and tyrosine are precursors for catecholamines.
• Tryptophan can form serotonin and niacin.
• Valine, leucine, and isoleucine are branched chain amino acids whose
metabolism is abnormal in maple syrup urine disease (see Chapter 17).
• Proline is a secondary amine whose presence in a protein disrupts normal
secondary structure.
Hydrophilic amino acids
• Have side chains that contain O or N atoms; some of the hydrophilic side
chains are charged at physiologic pH
• The acidic amino acids (aspartic and glutamic acids) have carboxyl groups
that are negatively charged, whereas the basic amino acids (lysine, arginine,
and histidine) have nitrogen atoms that are positively charged.
115
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Additional points about some of these amino acids include:
• Serine and threonine are sites for O linked glycosylation of proteins, a
posttranslational modification that should be associated with the Golgi
MedicalGenetics apparatus.
• Asparagine is a site for N linked glycosylation of proteins, a cotransla
tional modification that should be associated with the endoplasmic
reticulum.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences • Cysteine contains sulfur and can form disulfide bonds to stabilize the
shape (tertiary structure) of proteins. Destroying disulfide bonds dena
tures proteins.
• Methionine, another sulfur containing amino acid, is part of
S adenosylmethionine (SAM), a methyl donor in biochemical pathways.
Nonpolar, Aliphatic Side Chains Aromatic Side Chains
COO: COO: COO: COO: COO: COO:
; ; ; ; ; ;
H3N C H H3N C H H3N C H H3N C H H3N C H H3N C H
H CH3 CH CH2 CH2 CH2
C CH
CH3 CH3
NH
Glycine Alanine Valine
Gly Ala Val
OH
COO: COO: COO:
; ; H
; C Phenylalanine Tyrosine Tryptophan
H3N C H H3N C H
H2N CH2 Phe Tyr Trp
CH2 H C CH3
H2C CH2
CH CH2
CH3 CH3 CH3
Leucine Isoleucine Proline
Leu Ile Pro
FigureFigure I I8822.. TThhee HydrHoypdhroobpihcobic Amino AAcimdsino Acids
Note: Tyrosine can be considered nonpolar or polar because of the ability of the -OH group to form a hydrogen bond.
11
CHAPTER 8 | AMINO ACIDS, PROTEINS, AND ENzYMES
Positively Charged R Groups Polar, Uncharged R Groups
COO: COO: COO: COO: COO: COO:
; ; ; ; ; ;
H3N C H H3N C H H3N C H H3N C H H3N C H H3N C H
CH2 CH2 CH2 CH2OH H C OH CH2
CH2 CH2 C NH CH3 SH
CH
CH2 CH2 ;
Serine Threonine Cysteine
C N
CH2 NH H H Ser Thr Cys
; ;
NH3 C NH2 COO: COO: COO:
NH2 ; ; ;
H3N C H H3N C H H3N C H
Lysine Arginine Histidine
CH2 CH2 CH2
Lys Arg His
CH2 C CH2
H2N O
Negatively Charged R Groups S C
H2N O
COO: COO: CH3
; ; Asparagine Glutamine
Methionine
H3N C H H3N C H
Asn Gln
Met
CH2 CH2
COO: CH2
COO:
Aspartate Glutamate
Asp Glu
Figure FigureI 8 I3.8 3T.heThe HHyyddrroopphhiilliicc AminoAminAocids Acids
Note: Methionine can be considered nonpolar or polar because it contains a sulfur.
11
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
HEMOGLOBINOPATHY
An 8 year old African American boy was experiencing pain in the chest and
back. He was taken to the hospital, where he was found to have mild anemia,
MedicalGenetics
splenomegaly, and rod shaped crystals in the erythrocytes. A preliminary
diagnosis of sickle cell anemia was made. To validate the diagnosis, a small
aliquot of his blood was subjected to electrophoresis to determine the identity
of the hemoglobin in his erythrocytes. After reviewing the data, the physician
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences concluded that he did not have sickle cell anemia, but rather a sickle cell
anemia–like hemoglobinopathy with the relatively common mutation of HbC.
Standard
Patien
+
HbA
HbS
HbC
–
Sickle cell anemia is characterized by severe pain in the bones, abdomen, and
chest, along with periods of hemolytic problems. Episodes of vaso occlusive
pain lasting approximately 1 week are a frequent problem. These crises are
often precipitated by dehydration or infection. A widely used method to
analyze hemoglobins found in various hemoglobinopathies is electrophoresis
at pH 8.4, where single amino acid substitutions can be easily detected. In
sickle cell anemia, there is a substitution of valine for glutamate at position
6 in Hb, meaning that the HbS will have one less negative charge overall
compared with HbA. In HbC, there is a substitution of lysine for glutamate
at position 6, meaning that HbC will have two additional positive charges
compared with HbA. These 3 hemoglobins can be resolved by electrophoresis.
PROTEIN TURNOVER AND AMINO ACID NUTRITION
When older proteins are broken down in the body, they must be replaced. This
concept is called protein turnover, and different types of proteins have very
different turnover rates. Protein synthesis occurs during the process of translation
on ribosomes. Protein breakdown tends to occurs in 2 cellular locations:
• Lysosomal proteases digest endocytosed proteins.
• Large cytoplasmic complexes (or proteasomes) digest older or abnormal
proteins that have been covalently tagged with a protein (called ubiquitin)
for destruction.
118
CHAPTER 8 | AMINO ACIDS, PROTEINS, AND ENzYMES
Essential Amino Acids
All 20 types of amino acids are required for protein synthesis. These amino acids
can be derived from digesting dietary protein and absorbing their constituent
amino acids or, alternatively, by synthesizing them de novo.
There are 10 amino acids that cannot be synthesized in humans and thus must be
provided from dietary sources. These are called the essential amino acids.
Arginine is required only during periods of growth or positive nitrogen balance.
Table I 8 1. Essential Amino Acids
Arginine* Methionine
Histidine Phenylalanine
Isoleucine Threonine
Leucine Tryptophan
Lysine Valine
*Essential only during periods of positive nitrogen balance.
Nitrogen Balance
Nitrogen balance is the (normal) condition in which the amount of nitrogen
incorporated into the body each day exactly equals the amount excreted.
Negative nitrogen balance occurs when nitrogen loss exceeds incorporation. It is
associated with:
• Protein malnutrition (kwashiorkor) NOTE
• Dietary deficiency of even 1 essential amino acid Do not confuse kwashiorkor with marasmus.
• Starvation Marasmus is a chronic deficiency of
calories; patients do not present with edema
• Uncontrolled diabetes
as they do with kwashiorkor.
• Infection
Positive nitrogen balance occurs when the amount of nitrogen incorporated
exceeds the amount excreted. It is associated with:
• Growth
• Pregnancy
• Convalescence (recovery phase of injury or surgery)
• Recovery from condition associated with negative nitrogen balance
11
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
NOTE BIOCHEMICAL REACTIONS
Hydrolysis of high energy bonds in ATP or Chemical reactions have 2 independent properties: energy and rate.
GTP provide energy to drive reactions in
∆G represents the amount of energy released or required per mole of reactant.
MedicalGenewtichsich ∆G >0.
The amount or sign of ∆G indicates nothing about the rate of the reaction.
Table I 8 2. Energy versus Rate
Energy (∆G) Rate (v)
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Not affected by enzymes Increased by enzymes
Decrease energy of activation,
∆G <0, thermodynamically spontane
ous (energy released, often irreversible) ∆G‡
∆G >0, thermodynamically
nonspontaneous (energy required)
∆G = 0, reaction at equilibrium (freely
reversible)
∆G0 = energy involved under
standardized conditions
The rate of the reaction is determined by the energy of activation (∆G‡), which is
the energy required to initiate the reaction. ∆G and ∆G‡ are represented in the
figure below. Enzymes lower the energy of activation for a reaction; they do not
affect the value of ∆G or the equilibrium constant for the reaction, Keq.
Energ ∆G‡
Enzyme catalyzed
Gs
Uncatalyzed Free
∆G
Energy
∆G‡
Gp
Enzyme catalyzed
Gs
Uncatalyzed Free
Reaction Progress
∆G
Gp Figure I 8 4. Energy Profile for
a Catalyzed and Uncatalyzed Reaction
Reaction Progress
Figure I 8 4. Energy Profile for aFCigautarelyzed Ian8d 4U.ncaEtanleyrzgeyd RPearoctfiiolen for
a Catalyzed and Uncatalyzed Reaction
Michaelis Menten Equation
The Michaelis Menten equation describes how the rate of the reaction, V, depends
on the concentration of both the enzyme [E] and the substrate [S], which forms
product [P].
E + S ⇋ E - S → E + P
_k_2_[E_]____ [S] _V_m__a_x___ [S]
V = or, with [E] held constant V =
km + [S] km + [S]
Note: Vmax = k2[E]
120
CHAPTER 8 | AMINO ACIDS, PROTEINS, AND ENzYMES
Vmax is the maximum rate possible to achieve with a given amount of enzyme. The
only way to increase Vmax is by increasing the [E]. In the cell, this can be accom
plished by inducing the expression of the gene encoding the enzyme.
The other constant in the equation, Km is often used to compare enzymes. Km is
the substrate concentration required to produce half the maximum velocity. Under
certain conditions, Km is a measure of the affinity of the enzyme for its substrate.
When comparing two enzymes, the one with the higher Km has a lower affinity for
its substrate. The Km value is an intrinsic property of the enzyme substrate system
and cannot be altered by changing [S] or [E].
When the relationship between [S] and V is determined in the presence of constant
enzyme, many enzymes yield the graph shown below, a hyperbola.
BRIDGE TO MEDICAL GENETICS
Vmax Amissense mutation in the coding region of
50 a gene may yield an enzyme with a different
(μmol/sec Km.
25
V
Km
2 4 6 8 10
[S] (mM)
Figure Figure I 8I 85.5.MMicihcahealeilsis MentMenentenPlot Plot
Recall Question
Which of the following conditions will result in arginine becoming
an essential amino acid?
A. Diabetes
B. Pregnancy
C. Sepsis
D. Starvation
Answer: B
121
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Lineweaver Burk Equation
The Lineweaver Burk equation is a reciprocal form of the Michaelis Menten
equation. The same data graphed yield a straight line, as shown below.
MedicalGenetics
The actual data are represented by the portion of the graph to the right of the
y axis, but the line is extrapolated into the left quadrant to determine its intercept
with the x axis. The intercept of the line with the x axis gives the value of –1/Km.
The intercept of the line with the y axis gives the value of 1/Vmax.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences _1_ __K__m____ 1 ____1_
+
V =
Vmax [S] Vmax
0.06
(sec/μmol
0.04
1 v
0.02 1
Vmax
:1.0 :0.5 0 0.5 1.0
1 1
:
[S] (mM:1)
Km
Figure I 8 6. Lineweaver Burk Plot
NOTE Figure I 8 6. Lineweaver Burk Plot
Many drugs are competitive inhibitors of
key enzymes in pathways. Inhibitors and Activators
• The statin drugs (lovastatin, Competitive inhibitors resemble the substrate and compete for binding to the
simvastatin), used to control blood active site of the enzyme. Noncompetitive inhibitors do not bind at the active site;
they bind to regulatory sites on the enzyme.
cholesterol, competitively inhibit
3 hydroxy 3 methylglutaryl coenzyme A
(HMG CoA) reductase in cholesterol Table I 8 3. Important Classes of Enzyme Inhibitors
biosynthesis.
Class of Inhibitor Km Vmax
• Methotrexate, an antineoplastic drug, Competitive Increase No effect
competitively inhibits dihydrofolate
Noncompetitive No effect Decrease
reductase, depriving the cell of active
folate needed for purine and
The effects of these classes of inhibitors on Lineweaver Burk kinetics are shown
deoxythymidine synthesis, thus
below. Notice that on a Lineweaver Burk graph, inhibitors always lie above the
interfering with DNA replication during
control on the right side of the y axis.
S phase.
An example of a noncompetitive inhibitor is
allopurinol, which noncompetitively inhibits
xanthine oxidase.
122
CHAPTER 8 | AMINO ACIDS, PROTEINS, AND ENzYMES
1 1
V V ; Inhibitor
; Inhibitor
No inhibitor present No inhibitor present
1 1
0 0
[S] [S]
Figure FigureI 8I 87. 7.LiLnienweweaevaevrer Burk BuPrlkot ofPlot Figure FiguIre8 8I.8 L8i.newLeianveewreaver BuBrkurkPlot Poloft
of ComCopmetipteivtietive InhibInithioibnition of NoncomNpeotnitciovmepetitive InInhhibibitiitoionn
Figure I 8 9 shows the effect on a Lineweaver Burk plot of adding more enzyme. It
might also represent adding an activator to the existing enzyme or a covalent
modification of the enzyme. An enzyme activator is a molecule that binds to an
enzyme and increases its activity. In these latter two cases the Km might decrease
and/or the Vmax might increase but the curve would always be below the control
curve in the right hand quadrant of the graph.
Enzyme + substrate
1
V control curve
Add more enzyme,
or activator
1
0
[S] HY HY
MY MY
Figure IF8igure9. LIine8we9a.verLineweaver BuBrkurk PPlloott ShoSwhionwging the Addtihtieon Addition
of More of EMnzoyreme Enzyme or orthethe AAddddiittiioonn of aonf AacntivatorActivator LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Cooperative Enzyme Kinetics BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
Certain enzymes do not show the normal hyperbola when grapheMdEDIUM on aYIELD MethanoMlEDIUMpoisoningYIELD(wood alcohol
Michaelis Menten plot ([S] versus V), but rather show sigmoid kinetics owing to poisoning) is treated with ethanol
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
cooperativity among substrate binding sites. Cooperative enzymes have multiple
administration. Both are substrates for
subunits and multiple active sites. Enzymes showing cooperative kinetics are often
alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH), with ethanol
regulatory enzymes in pathways (for example, phosphofructokinase 1 [PFK 1] in
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
glycolysis). having a much lower Km for the enzyme
compared with methanol. This prevents
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
In addition to their active sites, these enzymes often have multiple sites for a
methanol from being converted to
variety of activators and inhibitors (e.g., AMP, ATP, citrate, fructose 2,6 bisphos
formaldehyde, which is toxic and not
phate [F2,6 BP]). Cooperative enzymes are sometimes referred to as allosteric
metabolized further.
enzymes because of the shape changes that are induced or stabilized by binding
substrates, inhibitors, and activators.
12
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Activator
V
MedicalGenetics
Control
Inhibitor
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
HY
[S]
MY
Figure I 8 10. Cooperative Kinetics
Figure I 8 10. Cooperative Kinetics LY
High Yield H
Transport Kinetics
The Km and Vmax parameters that apply to enzymes are also applMicEabDleIUM toYIEtrLaDns ME
porters in membranes. The kinetics of transport can be derived from the
Michaelis Menten and Lineweaver Burk equations, where Km refers LtOoWthe YIEsoLlDute
concentration at which the transporter is functioning at half its maximum activity.
The importance of Km values for membrane transporters is exemplified with the
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
variety of glucose transporters (GLUT) and their respective physiologic roles (see
Chapter 12). REINFORCEMENT RE
12
CHAPTER 8 | AMINO ACIDS, PROTEINS, AND ENzYMES
Review Questions
Select the ONE best answer.
1. The peptide ala arg his gly glu is treated with peptidases to release all of
the amino acids. The solution is adjusted to pH 7, and electrophoresis is
performed. In the electrophoretogram depicted below, the amino acid indi
cated by the arrow is most likely to be
–
+
Figure SQ VIII 1
A. glycine
B. arginine
C. glutamate
D. histidine
E. alanine
2. The reaction catalyzed by hepatic phosphofructokinase 1 has a ∆G0 value
of –3.5 kcal/mol. This value indicates that under standard conditions this
reaction
A. is reversible
B. occurs very slowly
C. produces an activator of pyruvate kinase
D. is inhibited by ATP
E. has a low energy of activation
F. will decrease in activity as the pH decreases
G. cannot be used for gluconeogenesis
H. shows cooperative substrate binding
I. is indirectly inhibited by glucagon
J. is stimulated by fructose 2,6 bisphosphate
12
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
3. The activity of an enzyme is measured at several different substrate concen
trations, and the data are shown in the table below.
[S] (mM) V0 (mmol/sec)
MedicalGenetics
0.010 2.0
0.050 9.1
0.100 17
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences 0.500 50
1.00 67
5.00 91
10.0 95
50.0 99
100.0 100
Km for this enzyme is approximately
A. 50.0
B. 10.0
C. 5.0
D. 1.0
E. 0.5
4. Which of the diagrams illustrated below best represents the effect of ATP
on hepatic phosphofructokinase 1 (PFK 1)?
+ATP
velocity velocity velocity velocity
velocit
+ATP +ATP
+ATP
+ATP
A Fructose 6 P B Fructose 6 P C Fructose 6 P D Fructose 6 P E Fructose 6 P
Figure SQ VIII 2
126
CHAPTER 8 | AMINO ACIDS, PROTEINS, AND ENzYMES
5. Several complexes in the mitochondrial electron transport chain contain
non heme iron. The iron in these complexes is bound tightly to the thiol
group of which amino acid?
A. Glutamine
B. Methionine
C. Cysteine
D. Tyrosine
E. Serine
Items 6–8
Consider a reaction that can be catalyzed by one of two enzymes, A and B, with
the following kinetics.
Km (M) Vmax (mmol/min)
A. 5 × 10−6 20
B. 5 × 10−4 30
6. At a concentration of 5 × 10 6 M substrate, the velocity of the reaction
catalyzed by enzyme A will be
A. 10
B. 15
C. 20
D. 25
E. 30
7. At a concentration of 5 × 10 4 M substrate, the velocity of the reaction
catalyzed by enzyme B will be
A. 10
B. 15
C. 20
D. 25
E. 30
8. At a concentration of 5 × 10 4 M substrate, the velocity of the reaction
catalyzed by enzyme A will be
A. 10
B. 15
C. 20
D. 25
E. 30
12
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
9. A worldwide pandemic of influenza caused by human adapted strains of
avian influenza or bird flu is a serious health concern. One drug for treat
ment of influenza, Tamiflu (oseltamivir), is an inhibitor of the influenza
viral neuraminidase required for release of the mature virus particle from
MedicalGenetics the cell surface. Recent reports have raised concerns regarding viral resis
tance of Tamiflu compelling the search for alternative inhibitors. Another
drug, Relenza (zanamivir), is already FDA approved for use in a prophylac
tic nasal spray form. The graph below show kinetic data obtained for viral
neuraminidase activity (measured as the release of sialic acid from a model
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
substrate) as a function of substrate concentration in the presence and
absence of Relenza and Tamiflu.
+ Relenza
4
+ Tamiflu
1/V 3
(μmoles/min)
No inhibitor
2
1
0 10 20 30 40
1/[S] (μM)
Based on the kinetic data, which of the following statements is correct?
A. Both drugs are competitive inhibitors of the viral neuraminidase.
B. Both drugs are noncompetitive inhibitors of the viral neuraminidase.
C. Tamiflu increases the Km value for the substrate compared to Relenza
D. Relenza increases the Vmax value for the substrate compared to Tamiflu.
E. Relenza is not an inhibitor of neuraminidase, but inhibits another viral
enzyme.
12
CHAPTER 8 | AMINO ACIDS, PROTEINS, AND ENzYMES
Answers
1. Answer: B. Arginine is the most basic of the amino acids (pI~11) and
would have the largest positive charge at pH 7.
2. Answer: G. The negative ∆G0 value indicates the reaction is thermody
namically favorable (irreversible), requiring a different bypass reaction for
conversion of F1, 6BP to F6P in the gluconeogenic pathway.
3. Answer: E. Because the apparent Vmax is near 100 mmol/sec, Vmax/2 equals
50 mmol/sec. The substrate concentration giving this rate is 0.50 mM.
4. Answer: B. Sigmoidal control curve with ATP inhibiting and shifting curve
to the right is needed.
5. Answer: C. Cysteine has a sulfhydryl group in its side chain. Although
methionine has a sulfur in its side chain, a methyl group is attached to it.
6. Answer: A. At the concentration of 5 × 10–6 M, enzyme A is working at
one half of its Vmax because the concentration is equal to the Km for the
substrate. Therefore, one half of 20 mmol/min is 10 mmol/min.
7. Answer: B. At the concentration of 5 × 10–4 M, enzyme B is working at
one half of its Vmax because the concentration is equal to the Km for the
substrate. Therefore, one half of 30 mmol/min is 15 mmol/min.
8. Answer: C. At the concentration of 5 × 10–4 M, 100 × the substrate concen
tration at Km, enzyme A is working at its Vmax, which is 20 mmol/min.
9. Answer: C. Based on the graph, when the substrate is present, Tamiflu
results in the same Vmax and higher Km compared to the line when no
inhibitor added. These are hallmarks of competitive inhibitors of enzymes,
which Tamiflu is. Noncompetitive inhibitors result in decreased Vmax and
the same Km with no inhibitor added, which is shown by the Relenza line in
the graph.
12

9#
Hormones
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Understand concepts concerning hormones and signal transduction
❏ Interpret scenarios about mechanism of water soluble hormones
❏ Answer questions about G proteins and second messengers in signal
transduction
HORMONES AND SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION
NOTE
Broadly speaking, a hormone is any compound produced by a cell, which by
The GI and endocrine hormones are
binding to its cognate receptor alters the metabolism of the cell bearing the
hormone–receptor complex. Although a few hormones bind to receptors on the discussed in detail in the GI and
cell that produces them (autoregulation or autocrine function), hormones endocrinology chapters in the Physiology
are more commonly thought of as acting on some other cell, either close by Lecture Notes. Although there is some
(paracrine) or at a distant site (telecrine).
overlap, this chapter presents basic
mechanistic concepts applicable to all
• Paracrine hormones are secreted into the interstitial space and generally
have a very short half life. These include the prostaglandins and the hormones, whereas coverage in the
neurotransmitters. Physiology Notes emphasizes the physiologic
• Telecrine hormones are secreted into the bloodstream, generally have a consequences of hormonal action.
longer half life, and include the endocrine and gastrointestinal (GI)
hormones. (The endocrine hormones are the classic ones, and it is some
times implied that reference is being made to endocrine hormones when
the word hormones is used in a general sense.)
Hormones are divided into 2 categories: those that are water soluble (hydrophilic)
and those that are lipid soluble (lipophilic, or hydrophobic).
13
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Table I 9 1. Two Classes of Hormones
Water Soluble Lipid Soluble
Receptor in cell membrane Receptor inside cell
MedicalGenetics
Second messengers often involved Hormone–receptor complex
Protein kinases activated binds hormone response
elements (HRE)
of enhancer regions in DNA
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Protein phosphorylation to modify —
activity of enzymes (requires minutes)
Control of gene expression through Control of gene expression
proteins such as cAMP response (requires hours)
element binding (CREB) protein
(requires hours)
Examples: Examples:
• Insulin • Steroids
• Glucagon • Calcitriol
• Catecholamines • Thyroxines
• Retinoic acid
MECHANISM OF WATER SOLUBLE HORMONES HY
Water soluble hormones must transmit signals to affect metabolism and geneMY
expression without themselves entering the cytoplasm. They often do so via second
messenger systems that activate protein kinases. LY
High Yield H
Protein Kinases
A protein kinase is an enzyme that phosphorylates other proteins, MEDIUMchanging YIELD their ME
activity (e.g., phosphorylation of acetyl CoA carboxylase inhibits it).
LOW YIELD
Some water soluble hormones bind to receptors with intrinsic protein kinase
activity (often tyrosine kinases). In this case, no second messenger is required for
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
protein kinase activation. The insulin receptor is an example of a tyrosine kinase
receptor.
REINFORCEMENT RE
Activation of a protein kinase causes:
• Phosphorylation of enzymes to rapidly increase or decrease their activity.
• Phosphorylation of gene regulatory proteins such as CREB to control gene
expression, usually over several hours. The typical result is to add more
enzyme to the cell. CREB induces the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
(PEPCK) gene. Kinetically, an increase in the number of enzymes means
an increase in Vmax for that reaction.
Both represent strategies to control metabolism. The action of protein kinases is
reversed by protein phosphatases.
13
MY MY
CHAPTER 9 | HORMONES
LY LY
Sequence of Events from Receptor High Yield HIGH YIELD
to Protein Kinase
MEDIUM YIELD MEDIUM YIELD
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
G protein
Receptors in these pathways are coupled through trimeric G proteins in the
membrane. The 3 subunits in this type of G protein are α, β, andFUNγD.AMInENTiAtsLSinactive FUNDAMENTALS
form, the α subunit binds GDP and is in complex with the β and γ subunits. When
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
a hormone binds to its receptor, the receptor becomes activated and, in turn,
engages the corresponding G protein (step 1 below). The GDP is replaced with
GTP, enabling the α subunit to dissociate from the β and γ subunits (step 2 below).
The activated α subunit alters the activity of adenylate cyclase. If the α subunit is αs,
then the enzyme is activated; if the α subunit is αi, then the enzyme is inhibited. The
GTP in the activated α subunit will be dephosphorylated to GDP (step 3 below)
and will rebind to the β and γ subunits (step 4 below), rendering the G protein
inactive.
α β α β
GDP GTP
γ γ
Inactive G protein Active G protein
α
β GTP
Enzyme
γ
(adenylate cyclase)
α
GDP Pi
Figure IFig9ure2. ITr9im1e.ricTrimeric G GPrPotreoitnein CyCclyecle
13
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Cyclic AMP (cAMP) and phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate (PIP2)
The receptors all have characteristic 7 helix membrane spanning domains.
The sequence of events, leading from receptor to activation of the protein kinase
MedicalGenetics via the cAMP and PIP2 second messenger systems, is as follows:
• Hormone binds receptor
• Trimeric G protein in membrane is engaged
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences • Enzyme (adenylate cyclase or phospholipase) activated
• Second messenger generated
• Protein kinase activated
• Protein phosphorylation (minutes) and gene expression (hours)
An example of inhibition of adenylate cyclase via Gi is epinephrine inhibition
(through its binding to α2 adrenergic receptor) of insulin release from β cells of
the pancreas.
cAMP System PIP2 System
+ +
NH3 NH3
Receptor for: Receptor for:
• Glucagon • Vasopressin
• Epinephrine β (Gs ) • Epinephrine α1
• Epinephrine α2 (Gi ) • Angiotensin II
PIP2 DAG
Membrane
Cytoplasm α Adenyl COO–α Phospho + Protein
β cyclase β lipase C kinase C
γ ATP γ
Gs or Gi Gq IP3
COO–CREB cAMP Ca2+
+
+
+ ER Ca2+ Gene
expression
CREB P Protein kinase A
+
Nucleus P +
Protein kinase
CREB
CRE Gene P
Enzymes Enzymes
DNA ++
dephosphorylated phosphorylated
(phosphatase)
Gene expression in nucleus
Figure IF9igure3. CIycl9ic 2. CyAclMicP AMPandand PhPohsopshpahtaidtiydlyinlionsoistoitlol BisphosphaBteisphosphate(PIP2) (PIP2)
13
CHAPTER 9 | HORMONES
cGMP NOTE
Atrial natriuretic factor (ANF), produced by cells in the atrium of the heart in Once generated, the second messengers
response to distension, binds the ANF receptor in vascular smooth muscle and in
cAMP and cGMP are slowly degraded by a
the kidney. The ANF receptor spans the membrane and has guanylate cyclase
class of enzymes called phosphodiesterases
activity associated with the cytoplasmic domain. It causes relaxation of vascular
(PDEs)
smooth muscle, resulting in vasodilation, and in the kidney it promotes sodium
and water excretion.
Nitric oxide (NO) is synthesized by vascular endothelium in response to vasodila
tors. It diffuses into the surrounding vascular smooth muscle, where it directly
binds the heme group of soluble guanylate cyclase, activating the enzyme.
Both the ANF receptor and the soluble guanylate cyclase are associated with the
same vascular smooth muscle cells.
Drugs:
• Nitroprusside
+
• Nitroglycerine
NH3
Arginine • Isosorbide
dinitrate
Receptors for
Nitric oxide
atrial natriuretic
synthase
factor (ANF)
Nitric oxide (NO)
Membrane
Cytoplasm
NO
Receptor + BRIDGE TO MICROBIOLOGY
guanylate COO–GTP Soluble guanylate cyclase
E. coli heat stable toxin (STa)
cyclase
cGMP
Asimilar guanylate cyclase receptor in
enterocytes is the target of E. coli heat
+
stable toxin (STa). The toxin binds to, and
Vascular Smooth
Protein kinase G GTP
Muscle stimulates, the guanylate cyclase increasing
cGMP. This causes increased activity of CFTR
and diarrhea.
Relaxation of smooth muscle
(vasodilation)
Figure I 9 4. Cyclic GMP
Figure I 9 3. Cyclic GMP
The sequence from receptor to protein kinase is quite similar to the one above for
cAMP, with 2 important variations:
• The ANF receptor has intrinsic guanylate cyclase activity. Because no G
protein is required in the membrane, the receptor lacks the 7 helix
membrane spanning domain.
• Nitric oxide diffuses into the cell and directly activates a soluble, cytoplas
mic guanylate cyclase, so no receptor or G protein is required.
135
Immunology
MY
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY LY
Biochemistry
High Yield H
The Insulin Receptor: A Tyrosine Kinase
Insulin binding activates the tyrosine kinase activity associated MEwDiIthUM the YcIyEtLopDlas ME
mic domain of its receptor. There is no trimeric G protein, enzyme, or second
LOW YIELD
messenger required to activate this protein tyrosine kinase activity:
MedicalGenetics
• Hormone binds receptor
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
• Receptor tyrosine kinase (protein kinase) is activated
REINFORCEMENT RE
• Protein phosphorylation (autophosphorylation and activation of other
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
proteins)
Once autophosphorylation begins, a complex of other events ensues. An insulin
receptor substrate (IRS 1) binds the receptor and is phosphorylated on tyrosine
residues, allowing proteins with SH2 (src homology) domains to bind to the
phosphotyrosine residues on IRS 1 and become active. In this way, the receptor
activates several enzyme cascades, which involve:
• Activation of phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (PI 3 kinase), one of whose
effects in adipose and muscle tissues is to increase GLUT 4 in the mem
brane
• Activation of protein phosphatases. Paradoxically, insulin stimulation via
its tyrosine kinase receptor ultimately may lead to dephosphorylating
enzymes
• Stimulation of the monomeric G protein (p21ras) encoded by the normal
ras gene
All these mechanisms can be involved in controlling gene expression, although the
pathways by which this occurs have not yet been completely characterized.
13
CHAPTER 9 | HORMONES
Insulin binding
activates tyrosine
s s s kinase activity s s s s s
P P
P P
Insulin receptor
ADP ADP
substrate (IRS) binds
IRS 1 receptor and is
Tyrosine kinase
ATP ATP phosphorylated
on tyrosine residues
Autophosphorylation P P P
of receptor SH2 SH2 SH2
PI 3 kinase domain proteins SH2
Protein bind phosphotyrosine
residues on IRS
Protein kinase
Protein
P
Translocation of GLUT 4
Enzymes Enzymes
to membrane in:
dephosphorylated phosphorylated
• Adipose
+
• Muscle
p21ras
G protein
Protein +
phosphatase Gene expression
in nucleus
Figure I 9 5. Insulin Receptor
Figure I 9 4. Insulin Receptor
Tyrosine kinase receptors are also involved in signaling by several growth factors,
including platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) and epidermal growth factor
(EGF).
Recall Question
Epinephrine, through inhibition of adenylate cyclase, prevents the
secretion of which of the following products?
A. Gastrin
B. Glucagon
C. Insulin
D. Lipoprotein lipase
Answer: C
13
Immunology
MY
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY LY
Biochemistry
High Yield H
Functional Relationship of Glucagon
and Insulin MEDIUM YIELD ME
Insulin (associated with well fed, absorptive metabolism) and glucagon (associated
LOW YIELD
MedicalGenetics with fasting and postabsorptive metabolism), usually oppose each other with
respect to pathways of energy metabolism. Glucagon works through the cAMP
system to activate protein kinase A favoring phosphorylation of FUraNteDAMElimNTitAinLgS FUN
enzymes, whereas insulin often activates protein phosphatases that dephosphory
late many of the same enzymes. REINFORCEMENT RE
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Glucagon promotes phosphorylation of both rate limiting enzymes (glycogen
phosphorylase for glycogenolysis and glycogen synthase for glycogen synthesis).
The result is twofold in that synthesis slows and degradation increases, but both
effects contribute to the same physiologic outcome, release of glucose from the
liver during hypoglycemia.
Insulin reverses this pattern, promoting glucose storage after a meal. The recipro
cal relationship between glucagon and insulin is manifested in other metabolic
pathways, such as triglyceride synthesis and degradation.
Glucagon
+
Protein
ATP ADP
kinase A
Glycogen phosphorylase Glycogen phosphorylase
P
(glycogenolysis) (glycogenolysis)
LESS ACTIVE ACTIVE
Glycogen
Glycogenolysis
synthesis
Glycogen synthase Glycogen synthase
(store glucose) (glycogen synthesis) (glycogen synthesis) (release glucose)
P
ACTIVE LESS ACTIVE
Protein
Pi phosphatase H2O
+
Insulin
Figure I 9 6. Opposing Activities of Insulin and Glucagon
Figure I 9 5. Opposing Activities of Insulin and Glucagon
13
CHAPTER 9 | HORMONES
G PROTEINS IN SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION
There are several G proteins (GTP binding) involved. Trimeric G proteins include
Gs, Gi, Gq, and in the photoreceptor pathway reviewed in Chapter 10, Gt (transdu
cin). Receptors that engage these all have the 7 helix membrane spanning struc
ture. Receptor stimulation causes the Gα subunit to bind GTP and become active.
The Gα subunit subsequently hydrolyzes the GTP to GDP, terminating the signal.
The p21ras G protein is monomeric.
G protein defects can cause disease in several ways.
Table I 9 2. Abnormal G Proteins and Disease
Defect Example Disease
ADP ribosylation
by:
Gsα Diarrhea of cholera
• Cholera toxin
Gsα Traveler’s diarrhea
• E. coli toxin
Giα Pertussis (whooping cough)
• Pertussis
HY HY
toxin
Oncogenic muta p21ras (ras) Colon, lung, breast, bladder tumMorYs MY
tions
LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
ADP Ribosylation by Bacterial Toxins
Certain bacterial exotoxins are enzymes which attach the adenosinMeEDIUM diphospYhIaEteLD MEDIUM YIELD
(ADP) ribose residue of NAD to Gα subunits, an activity known as ADP ribosyl
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
ation. In humans, some ADP ribosylation is physiological but it may also be
pathological:
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
• Vibrio cholerae exotoxin ADP ribosylates Gsα, leading to an increase in
cAMP and subsequently chloride secretion from intestinal mucosal cells,
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
and causing the diarrhea of cholera.
• Certain strains of Escherichia coli release toxins (heat labile or LT) similar
to cholera toxin, producing traveler’s diarrhea.
• Bordetella pertussis exotoxin ADP ribosylates Giα, dramatically reducing
its responsiveness to the receptor, thus increasing cAMP. It is not known
how this relates to the persistent paroxysmal coughing symptomatic of
pertussis (whooping cough).
13
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Protein (such as Gαs)
O
MedicalGenetics
O: NH2
ADP ribosylated
;
O P O N protein
O
O
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Toxin O
O O
: P
OH OH
NH2
O O
N HO OH N
N O NH2
: P
O P O O O
N N O N
O: O
N
N
OH
OH OH HO
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) + nicotinamide
Figure I 9 6. ADP Ribosylation of a Protein
Figure I 9 7. ADP Ribosylation of a Protein
LIPID SOLUBLE HORMONES
Lipid soluble hormones diffuse through the cell membrane, where they bind to
their respective receptors inside the cell. The receptors have a DNA binding
domain (usually Zn fingers) and interact with specific response elements in
enhancer (or possibly silencer) regions associated with certain genes.
For example, the cortisol receptor binds to its response element in the enhancer
region of the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) gene. By increasing
the amount of PEPCK in the hepatocyte, cortisol can increase the capacity for
gluconeogenesis, one of its mechanisms for responding to chronic stress often
associated with injury.
The enhancer mechanism was reviewed in Chapter 5.
14
CHAPTER 9 | HORMONES
Review Questions
Select the ONE best answer.
1. A patient with manic depressive disorder is treated with lithium, which
slows the turnover of inositol phosphates and the phosphatidyl inositol
derivatives in cells. Which of the following protein kinases is most directly
affected by this drug?
A. Protein kinase C
B. Receptor tyrosine kinase
C. Protein kinase G
D. Protein kinase A
E. Protein kinase M
Items 2 and 3
Tumor cells from a person with leukemia have been analyzed to determine which
oncogene is involved in the transformation. After partial sequencing of the gene,
the predicted gene product is identified as a tyrosine kinase.
2. Which of the following proteins would most likely be encoded by an onco
gene and exhibit tyrosine kinase activity?
A. Nuclear transcriptional activator
B. Epidermal growth factor
C. Membrane associated G protein
D. Platelet derived growth factor
E. Growth factor receptor
3. A kinetic analysis of the tyrosine kinase activities in normal and trans
formed cells is shown below. Which of the following conclusions is best
supported by these results?
Normal
cells
1/V
Tumor
cells
1/[ATP]
A. The tumor cell kinase has a higher than normal affinity for ATP
B. A kinase gene has been deleted from the tumor cell genome
C. A noncompetitive inhibitor has been synthesized in the tumor cells
D. A kinase gene has been amplified in the tumor cell genome
E. The tumor cell kinase has a lower than normal affinity for ATP
14
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
4. In a DNA sequencing project, an open reading frame (ORF) has been iden
tified. The nucleotide sequence includes a coding region for an SH2 domain
in the protein product. This potential protein is most likely to
A. bind to an enhancer region in DNA
MedicalGenetics
B. be a transmembrane hormone receptor
C. transmit signals from a tyrosine kinase receptor
D. bind to an upstream promoter element
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences E. activate a soluble guanyl cyclase enzyme in vascular smooth muscle
β
γ
α + Enzyme Second
messenger
Substrate
5. The diagram above represents a signal transduction pathway associated
with hormone X. The receptor for hormone X is most likely to be charac
terized as a(n)
A. seven helix transmembrane domain receptor
B. intracellular receptor with a zinc finger domain
C. helix turn helix transmembrane domain receptor
D. transmembrane receptor with a guanyl cyclase domain
E. tyrosine kinase domain receptor
6. A 58 year old man with a history of angina for which he occasionally takes
isosorbide dinitrate is having erectile dysfunction. He confides in a col
league, who suggests that sildenafil might help and gives him 3 tablets from
his own prescription. The potentially lethal combination of these drugs
relates to
Isosorbide Dinitrate Sildenafil
A. Activates nitric oxide Inhibits guanyl cyclase in
synthase in vascular vascular smooth muscle
endothelium
B. Activates nitric oxide Inhibits guanyl cyclase in
synthase in vascular corpora cavernosa smooth
endothelium muscle
C. Releases cyanide as a Inhibits cGMP phosphodiester
byproduct ase in corpora cavernosa
smooth muscle
D. Activates guanyl cyclase in Inhibits cGMP phosphodiester
vascular smooth muscle ase in vascular smooth muscle
E. Activates the ANF receptor Inhibits protein kinase G in
in vascular smooth muscle vascular smooth muscle
14
CHAPTER 9 | HORMONES
Answers
1. Answer: A. The description best fits the PIP2 system in which protein
kinase C is activated.
2. Answer: E. Although any of the listed options might be encoded by an
oncogene, the “tyrosine kinase” description suggests it is likely to be a
growth factor receptor.
3. Answer: D. Because the y axis is 1/V, a smaller value for the 1/V means an
increase in Vmax. An increase in Vmax (with no change in Km) means an
increase in the number of enzymes (a kinase in this problem). Gene ampli
fication (insertion of additional copies of the gene in the chromosome) is a
well known mechanism by which oncogenes are overexpressed and by
which resistance to certain drugs is developed. For instance, amplification
of the dihydrofolate reductase gene can confer resistance to methotrexate.
4. Answer: C. Proteins with SH2 domains might bind to the insulin receptor
substrate 1 (IRS 1) to transmit signals from the insulin receptor, a tyrosine
kinase type of receptor. PI 3 kinase is an example of an SH2 domain pro
tein. SH2 domains are not involved in DNA binding (choices A and D).
Examples of protein domains that bind DNA include zinc fingers (steroid
receptors), leucine zippers (CREB protein), and helix turn helix proteins
(homeodomain proteins).
5. Answer: A. The diagram indicates that the receptor activates a trimeric
G protein associated with the inner face of the membrane and that the
G protein subsequently signals an enzyme catalyzing a reaction producing a
second messenger. Receptors that activate trimeric G proteins have a char
acteristic seven helix transmembrane domain. The other categories of
receptors do not transmit signals through trimeric G proteins.
6. Answer: D. Nitrates may be metabolized to nitric oxide (NO) that activates
a soluble guanyl cyclase in vascular smooth muscle. The increase in cGMP
activates protein kinase G and subsequently leads to vasodilation. Sildenafil
inhibits cGMP phosphodiesterase (PDE), potentiating vasodilation that can
lead to shock and sudden death. Although sildenafil has much higher
potency for the cGMP PDE isozyme in the corpora cavernosa, it can also
inhibit the cGMP PDE in vascular smooth muscle. Nitric oxide synthase
(choices A and B) is the physiologic source of nitric oxide in response to
vasodilators such as acetylcholine, bradykinin, histamine, and serotonin.
14

10 #
Vitamins
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Understand differences between vitamins and coenzymes of water
soluble hormones
❏ Know pathologies associated with water soluble vitamins
❏ Know metabolism and functions of the 4 fat soluble vitamins
VITAMINS
Vitamins have historically been classified as water soluble or lipid soluble.
Water soluble vitamins are precursors for coenzymes and are reviewed in the
context of the reactions for which they are important.
14
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Table I 10 1. Water Soluble Vitamins
Vitamin or
Coenzyme Enzyme Pathway Deficiency
MedicalGeneticsBiotin Pyruvate carboxylase Gluconeogenesis Most common cause (rare):
Acetyl CoA carboxylase Fatty acid synthesis excessive consumption of raw eggs
(contain avidin, a biotin binding
protein); also, biotinidase deficiency
Propionyl CoA carboxylase Odd carbon fatty acids, Alopecia (hair loss), bowel
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Val, Met, Ile, Thr inflammation, muscle pain
Thiamine (B1) Pyruvate dehydrogenase PDH Most common cause: alcoholism
(alcohol interferes with absorption)
α ketoglutarate dehydrogenase TCA cycle Wernicke (ataxia, nystagmus,
ophthalmoplegia)
Transketolase HMP shunt Korsakoff (confabulation, psychosis)
Wet beriberi (high output cardiac
failure, fluid retention, vascular
leak) and dry beriberi (peripheral
Branched chain ketoacid Metabolism of valine neuropathy)
dehydrogenase isoleucine and leucine
Niacin (B3) Dehydrogenases Many Pellagra: diarrhea, dementia,
dermatitis, and, if not treated,
death
NAD(H)
Pellagra may also be related to
NADP(H)
deficiency of tryptophan (corn is
low in tryptophan), which supplies
a portion of the niacin requirement
Folic acid Thymidylate synthase Thymidine (pyrimidine) Most common cause: alcoholism
synthesis and pregnancy (body stores deplet
ed in 3 months), hemodialysis
THF Enzymes in purine synthesis Purine synthesis Homocysteinemia with risk of
need not be memorized deep vein thrombosis and athero
sclerosis
Megaloblastic (macrocytic)
anemia
Deficiency in early pregnancy
causes neural tube defects in fetus
Cyanocobala Homocysteine methyltransferase Methionine, SAM Most common cause: pernicious
min (B12) Methylmalonyl CoA mutase Odd carbon fatty acids, anemia. Also in aging, especially
Val, Met, Ile, Thr with poor nutrition, bacterial
overgrowth of terminal ileum,
resection of the terminal ileum
secondary to Crohn disease, chron
ic pancreatitis, and, rarely, vegans,
or infection with D. latum
Megaloblastic (macrocytic)
anemia
Progressive peripheral neuropathy
(continued )
14
CHAPTER 10 | VITAMINS
Table I 10 1. Water Soluble Vitamins (continued )
Vitamin or
Coenzyme Enzyme Pathway Deficiency
Pyridoxine (B6) Aminotransferases (transami Protein catabolism Most common cause: isoniazid
nase): therapy
Pyridoxal P (PLP)
AST (GOT), ALT (GPT) Sideroblastic anemia
Heme synthesis
δ aminolevulinate synthase Cheilosis or stomatitis (cracking
or scaling of lip borders and
corners of the mouth)
Convulsions
Riboflavin (B2) Dehydrogenases Few Corneal neovascularization
FAD(H2)
Cheilosis or stomatitis (cracking
or scaling of lip borders and
corners of the mouth)
Magenta colored tongue
Ascorbate (C) Prolyl and lysyl hydroxylases Collagen synthesis Most common cause: diet
deficient in citrus fruits and green
Dopamine hydroxylase
vegetables
Catecholamine synthesis
Scurvy: poor wound healing, easy
Absorption of iron in
bruising (perifollicular hemorrhage),
GI tract
bleeding gums, increased bleeding
time, painful glossitis, anemia
Pantothenic Fatty acid synthase Fatty acid metabolism Rar
acid
Fatty acyl CoA synthetase
CoA
Pyruvate dehydrogenase PDH
α ketoglutarate dehydrogenase TCA cycle
BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
SCURVY
High dose niacin can be used to treat
A 7 month old infant presented in a “pithed frog” position, in which he
hyperlipidemia.
lay on his back and made little attempt to lift the legs and arms because
of pain. The infant cried when touched or moved, and there appeared
to be numerous areas of swelling and bruising throughout the body. The
mother informed the pediatrician that the infant was bottle fed. However,
the mother stated that she always boiled the formula extensively, much
longer than the recommended time, to ensure that it was sterile.
The patient has infantile scurvy, which often occurs in infants 2–10 months
of age who are bottle fed with formula that is overheated for pasteurization
and not supplemented with vitamin C. Vitamin C is destroyed by excessive
heat. Although bleeding in an infant with scurvy might occur similarly as in
an adult, gum bleeding does not unless there are erupted teeth. Biochemically,
vitamin C is necessary as a cofactor by proline and lysine hydroxylases in
collagen synthesis. In scurvy, because proline and lysine residues are not
hydroxylated, hydrogen bonding within the triple helices does not take place.
Consequently, collagen fibers are significantly less stable than normal. Vitamin
C also has roles as 1) an antioxidant, 2) in reducing iron in the intestine to
enable the absorption of iron, and 3) in hepatic synthesis of bile acids.
147
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
NOTE There are 4 important lipid soluble vitamins: D, A, K, and E.
Vitamin D deficiency is caused
• Two of them (A and D) work through enhancer mechanisms similar to
by insufficient sunlight, inadequate fortified those for lipid soluble hormones.
MedicalGeneftoicosds (milk), or end stage renal disease
• In addition, all 4 have more specialized mechanisms through which they
(renal osteodystrophy).
act.
Symptoms:
Table I 10 2. Lipid Soluble Vitamins
• Bone demineralization
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Vitamin Important Functions
• Rickets (children)
D (cholecalciferol) In response to hypocalcemia, helps normalize
• Osteomalacia (adults) serum calcium levels
A (carotene) Retinoic acid and retinol act as growth regula
Vitamin A deficiency is caused by fat tors, especially in epithelium
malabsorption or a fat free diet. Retinal is important in rod and cone cells for
vision
Symptoms:
K (menaquinone, Carboxylation of glutamic acid residues in
• Night blindness
bacteria; phytoquinone, many Ca2+ binding proteins, importantly
plants) coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and X, as well as
• Keratinized squamous epithelia
protein C and protein S
• Xerophthalmia, Bitot spots
E (α tocopherol) Antioxidant in the lipid phase. Protects mem
brane lipids from peroxidation
• Keratomalacia, blindness
• Follicular hyperkeratosis
• Alopecia
VITAMIN D AND CALCIUM HOMEOSTASIS
Vitamin E deficiency is caused by fat Hypocalcemia (below normal blood calcium) stimulates release of parathyroid
hormone (PTH), which in turn binds to receptors on cells of the renal proximal
malabsorption or premature birth.
tubules. The receptors are coupled through cAMP to activation of a
Symptoms: 1α hydroxylase important for the final, rate limiting step in the conversion of
vitamin D to 1,25 DHCC (dihydroxycholecalciferol or calcitriol).
• Hemolytic anemia
Once formed, 1,25 DHCC acts on duodenal epithelial cells as a lipid soluble
• Acanthocytosis
hormone. Its intracellular receptor (a Zn finger protein) binds to response
elements in enhancer regions of DNA to induce the synthesis of calcium binding
• Peripheral neuropathy
proteins thought to play a role in stimulating calcium uptake from the GI tract.
• Ataxia
1,25 DHCC also facilitates calcium reabsorption in the kidney and mobilizes
• Retinitis pigmentosum calcium from bone when PTH is also present. All these actions help bring blood
calcium levels back within the normal range.
The relation of vitamin D to calcium homeostasis and its in vivo activation are
shown below.
14
CHAPTER 10 | VITAMINS
7 Dehydrocholesterol
Skin Dietary source required if insufficient
exposure to UV light. Vitamin D3 is found
UV light in saltwater fish (salmon) and egg yolks.
Vitamin D3, prepared from animal products
Cholecalciferol
and then irradiated with UV light, is added
(Vitamin D3)
to milk and some fortified cereals.
Liver
Cirrhosis and liver failure may produce
25 Hydroxylase
bone demineralization.
25 Hydroxycholecalciferol
Kidney
Hypocalcemia + PARATHYROID
1α Hydroxylase (induce) Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
1,25 Dihydroxycholecalciferol Patients with end stage renal disease develop renal
(Calcitriol, 1,25 DHCC) osteodystrophy; IV or oral 1,25 DHCC may be given.
BONE: Osteoclasts; Ca2+ INTESTINE (Duodenum): increase
mineralization or calcium uptake from intestine
HY HY
demineralization (with PTH)
MY MY
Figure FigIure10 I1.10 Sy1n.theSsyisnthesis aanndd ActAivcattiivoantion of Vitamoinf VitDamin D LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Synthesis of 1, 25 Dihydroxycholecalciferol BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
(Calcitriol) MEDIUM YIELD BisphospMhoEnDatIeUsM YIEaLreD a class of drugs used
Humans can synthesize calcitriol from 7 dehydrocholesterol derived from choles in the treatment of osteoporosis.
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
terol in the liver. Three steps are involved, each occurring in a different tissue:
• Function by inhibiting osteoclast
Step 1. Activation of 7 dehydrocholesterol by UV light in the skin produces action and resorption of bone; results
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
cholecalciferol (vitamin D3); this step is insufficient for many people in in a modest increase in bone mineral
cold, cloudy climates, and vitamin D3 supplementation RiEsINFnOecReCssEarMy.ENT REINFORCEMENT
density (BMD)
Step 2. 25 hydroxylation in the liver (patients with severe liver disease may need
• Will lead to strengthening of bone and
to be given 25 DHCC or 1,25 DHCC).
decrease in fractures
Step 3. 1α hydroxylation in the proximal renal tubule cells in response to PTH;
genetic deficiencies or patients with end stage renal disease develop • Commonly used bisphosphates are
renal osteodystrophy because of insufficiency of 1,25 DHCC and must
ibandronate, risedronate, and
be given 1,25 DHCC or a drug analog that does not require metabolism
alendronat
in the kidney. Such patients include those with:
• End stage renal disease secondary to diabetes mellitus
• Fanconi renal syndrome (renal proximal tubule defect)
• Genetic deficiency of the 1α hydroxylase (vitamin D resistant
rickets)
149
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
VITAMIN D TOXICITY
A 45 year old man had a 3 week history of weakness, excessive urination,
intense thirst, and staggering walk. For most of his adult life, he took
MedicalGenetics
excessive amounts of vitamin C because he was told it would help prevent
the common cold. The past month, he took excessive amounts of vitamin
D and calcium every day because he learned that he was developing
osteoporosis. Recent lab tests revealed greatly elevated serum calcium,
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
and vitamin D toxicity was diagnosed.
Vitamin D is highly toxic at consumption levels that continuously exceed
10× RDA, resulting in hypercalcemia. Unlike water soluble vitamins,
which are excreted in excess amounts, vitamin D can be stored in the liver
as 25 hydroxycholecalciferol. The excess vitamin D can promote intestinal
absorption of calcium and phosphate.
The direct effect of vitamin D excess on bone is resorption similar to that
seen in vitamin D deficiency. Therefore, the increased intestinal absorption
of calcium in vitamin D toxicity contributes to hypercalcemia. Rather than
help the man’s osteoporosis, a large amount of vitamin D can contribute
to it. Hypercalcemia can impair renal function, and early signs include
polyuria, polydipsia, and nocturia. Prolonged hypercalcemia can result in
HY
calcium deposition in soft tissues, notably the kidney, producing irreversible
kidney damage. MY
LY
High Yield H
CLINICAL CORRELATE Vitamin D Deficiency
Isotretinoin, a form of retinoic acid, is used Deficiency of vitamin D in childhood produces rickets, a constellat M ion EDIUM of YIE sk L e D letal ME
in the treatment of acne. It is teratogenic abnormalities most strikingly seen as deformities of the legs (although many other
LOW YIELD
developing bones are affected). Muscle weakness is common.
(malformations of the craniofacial, cardiac,
thymic, and CNS structures) and is therefore
Deficiency of vitamin D after epiphyseal fusion causes osteomalacia, which
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
absolutely contraindicated in pregnant produces less deformity than rickets. Osteomalacia may present as bone pain and
women. Use with caution in women of muscle weakness. REINFORCEMENT RE
childbearing age.
VITAMIN A
NOTE Vitamin A (carotene) is converted to several active forms in the body associated
with two important functions, maintenance of healthy epithelium and vision.
What to Know for the Exam
Biochemically, there are 3 vitamin A structures that differ on the basis of the
Vitamins: functional group on C 1: hydroxyl (retinol), carboxyl (retinoic acid), and aldehyde
(retinal).
• Clinical manifestations of deficiencies
• Enzymes that accumulate
Maintenance of Epithelium
• Pathways
Retinol and retinoic acid are required for the growth, differentiation, and mainte
nance of epithelial cells. In this capacity they bind intracellular receptors, which
• Preventions of deficiencies
are in the family of Zn finger proteins, and they regulate transcription through
• Treatments of deficiencies specific response elements.
15
CHAPTER 10 | VITAMINS
Vision
When first formed, all the double bonds in the conjugated double bond system in
retinal are in the trans configuration. This form, all trans retinal is not active. The
conversion of all trans retinal to the active form cis retinal takes place in the
pigmented epithelial cells. Cis retinal is then transferred to opsin in the rod cells
forming the light receptor rhodopsin. It functions similarly in rod and cone cells.
When exposed to light, cis retinal is converted all trans retinal. A diagram of the
signal transduction pathway for light activated rhodopsin in the rod cell is shown
in Figure I 10 2, along with the relationship of this pathway to rod cell anatomy
and changes in the membrane potential. Note the following points:
• Rhodopsin is a 7 pass receptor coupled to the trimeric G protein transdu
cin (Gt).
• When light is present, the pathway activates cGMP phosphodiesterase,
which lowers cGMP.
• Rhodopsin and transducin are embedded in the disk membranes in the
outer rod segment.
• cGMP gated Na+ channels in the cell membrane of the outer rod segment
respond to the decrease in cGMP by closing and hyperpolarizing the
membrane.
• The rod cell is unusual for an excitable cell in that the membrane is
partially depolarized (~ –30 mV) at rest (in darkness) and hyperpolarizes
on stimulation.
Because the membrane is partially depolarized in the dark, its neurotransmitter
glutamate is continuously released. Glutamate inhibits the optic nerve bipolar cells
with which the rod cells synapse. By hyperpolarizing the rod cell membrane, light
stops the release of glutamate, relieving inhibition of the optic nerve bipolar cell
and thus initiating a signal into the brain.
15
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
MedicalGenetics
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Intradisk space
Outer Rhodopsin
rod
segment
α cGMP
γ β PDE Light
Cytoplasm Gt cGMP
Light
5 ́GMP Dark
(inactive) cGMP +
Na+
Light
–30
Membrane
potential
(meV)
Inner –35 Cell membrane
rod
3 sec
segment
Bipolar
cell
Light
Figure I 10 2. Light Activated Signal Transduction in the Retinal Rod Cell
Figure I 10 2. Light Activated Signal Transduction in the Retinal Rod Cell
15
CHAPTER 10 | VITAMINS
VITAMIN A DEFICIENCY
A severe drought in portions of Kenya wiped out a family’s yam crop,
their primary food staple. Within several months, a 3 year old child in
the family began to complain of being unable to see very well, especially
at dusk or at night. Also, the child’s eyes were red due to constant rubbing
because of dryness.
Due to the ability of the liver to store vitamin A, deficiencies which are severe
enough to result in clinical manifestations are unlikely to be observed, unless
there is an extreme lack of dietary vitamin A over several months. Vitamin A
deficiency is the most common cause of blindness and is a serious problem in
developing countries. It has a peak incidence at age 3–5. In the United States,
vitamin A deficiency is most often due to fat malabsorption or liver cirrhosis.
Vitamin A deficiency results in night blindness (rod cells are responsible
for vision in low light), metaplasia of the corneal epithelium, xerophthalmia
(dry eyes), bronchitis, pneumonia, and follicular hyperkeratosis. The spots
or patches noted in the eyes of patients with vitamin A deficiency are known
as Bitot spots. Because vitamin A is important for differentiation of immune
cells, deficiencies can result in frequent infections.
β carotene is the orange pigment in yams, sweet potatoes, carrots, and yellow
squash. Upon ingestion, it can be cleaved relatively slowly to two molecules of
retinal by an intestinal enzyme, and each retinal molecule is then converted
to all trans retinol and then absorbed by interstitial cells. Therefore, it is an
excellent source of vitamin A.
Recall Question
NOTE
Resection of the terminal ileum in Crohn’s disease leads to deficiency If vitamin A is continuously ingested at levels
of which of the following vitamins? greater than 15× RDA, toxicity develops;
symptoms include excessive sweating, brittle
A. Biotin
nails, diarrhea, hypercalcemia,
B. Cyanocobalamin hepatotoxicity, vertigo, and nausea/vomiting.
C. Pyridoxine Unlike vitamin A, beta carotene is not toxic
at high levels
D. Riboflavin
E. Thiamine
Answer: B
VITAMIN K
Vitamin K is required to introduce Ca2+ binding sites on several calcium
dependent proteins. The modification which introduces the Ca2+ binding site is a
γ carboxylation of glutamyl residue(s) in these proteins, often identified simply as
the γ carboxylation of glutamic acid. Nevertheless, this vitamin K dependent
carboxylation is a cotranslational modification occurring as the proteins are
synthesized on ribosomes associated with the rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER)
during translation.
153
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
HEPATOCYTE
5 ́ 3 ́ 5 ́ mRNA COO–COO–mRNA 3 ́
MedicalGenetics
Vitamin K
Ribosome Ribosome
Carboxylation COO–COO–γ
Prothrombin Prothrombin
on RER on RER
by γ Glutamyl
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Carboxylase
γ Carboxy
Glutamic Acid
(binds Ca2+)
COO–NH2 NH2
Glutamic
acid
COO–Prothrombin
NH2
Secretion by exocytosis
Blood
Prothrombin
Figure I 10 3. Vitamin K–Dependent γ Carboxylation of Prothrombin
Figure I 10 3. Vitamin K–Dependent γ Carboxylation of Prothrombin
during Translation on the Rough Endoplasmic Reticulum (RER)
during Translation on the Rough Endoplasmic Reticulum (RER)
Examples of proteins undergoing this vitamin K–dependent carboxylation
include the coagulation factors II (prothrombin), VII, IX, and X, as well as the
anticoagulant proteins C and S. All these proteins require Ca2+ for their
function.
Vitamin K deficiency produces prolonged bleeding, easy bruising, and potentially
fatal hemorrhagic disease. Conditions predisposing to a vitamin K deficiency
include:
• Fat malabsorption (bile duct occlusion)
• Prolonged treatment with broad spectrum antibiotics (eliminate intestinal
bacteria that supply vitamin K)
• Breast fed newborns (little intestinal flora, breast milk very low in vitamin
K), especially in a home birth where a postnatal injection of vitamin K
may not be given
• Infants whose mothers have been treated with certain anticonvulsants
during pregnancy such as phenytoin (Dilantin)
15
CHAPTER 10 | VITAMINS
VITAMIN K DEFICIENCY
A 79 year old man living alone called his 72 year old sister and then
arrived at the hospital by ambulance complaining of weakness and
having a rapid heartbeat. His sister said that he takes no medications and
has a history of poor nutrition and poor hygiene. Physical examination
confirmed malnourishment and dehydration. A stool specimen was
positive for occult blood. He had a prolonged prothrombin time (PT), but
his liver function tests (LFTs) were within normal range. He was given an
injection of a vitamin that corrected his PT in 2 days.
Poor nutrition and malnourishment, lack of medications, occult blood in
the stool specimen, prolonged PT, and normal LFTs are all consistent with
vitamin K deficiency. Without vitamin K, several blood clotting factors
(prothrombin, X, IX, VII) are not γ carboxylated on glutamate residues by the
γ glutamyl carboxylase during their synthesis (cotranslational modification) in
hepatocytes. The PT returned to normal 2 days after a vitamin K injection.
Vitamin K deficiency should be distinguished from vitamin C deficiency.
Table I 10 3. Vitamin K versus Vitamin C Deficiency
Vitamin K Deficiency Vitamin C Deficiency
Easy bruising, bleeding Easy bruising, bleeding
Normal bleeding time Increased bleeding time
Increased PT Normal PT
Hemorrhagic disease with no • Gum hyperplasia, inflamma
connective tissue problems tion, loss of teeth
• Skeletal deformity in children
• Poor wound healing
• Anemia
Associated with: Associated with:
• Fat malabsorption • Diet deficient in citrus fruit,
green vegetables
• Long term antibiotic therapy
• Breast fed newborns
• Infant whose mother was
taking anticonvulsant therapy
during pregnancy
15
Immunology
MY
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY LY
Biochemistry
High Yield H
CLINICAL CORRELATE Anticoagulant Therapy
Relative to the other proteins that undergo Warfarin and dicumarol antagonize the γ carboxylation activity MEDoIfUMvitamin YIELDK and ME
γ carboxylation, protein C has a short half thus act as anticoagulants. They interfere with the cotranslational modification
LOW YIELD
during synthesis of the precoagulation factors.
MedicalGenetliicfse. Thus, initiation of warfarin therapy may
cause a transient hypercoagulable state.
Once these proteins have been released into the bloodstream, vitamin K is no
longer important for their subsequent activation and function. FUNDAMENTALS FUN
REINFORCEMENT RE
Related to this are 2 important points:
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
CLINICAL CORRELATE • Warfarin and dicoumarol prevent coagulation only in vivo and cannot
prevent coagulation of blood in vitro (drawn from a patient into a test
Vitamin K (SC, IM, oral, or IV) is used to
tube).
reverse bleeding from hypothrombinemia
• When warfarin and dicumarol are given to a patient, 2–3 days are
caused by excess warfarin.
required to see their full anticoagulant activity. Heparin or low molecular
weight heparin is often given to provide short term anticoagulant activity.
Heparin is an activator of antithrombin III.
VITAMIN E
Vitamin E (α tocopherol) is an antioxidant. As a lipid soluble compound, it is
especially important for protecting other lipids from oxidative damage. It prevents
peroxidation of fatty acids in cell membranes, helping to maintain their normal
fluidity.
Vitamin E deficiency can lead to hemolysis, neurologic problems, and retinitis
pigmentosa.
High blood levels of vitamin E can cause hemorrhage in patients given warfarin.
15
CHAPTER 10 | VITAMINS
Review Questions
Select the ONE best answer.
1. Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a genetically heterogeneous disease character
ized by progressive photoreceptor degeneration and ultimately blindness.
Mutations in more than 20 different genes have been identified in clinically
affected patients. Recent studies have mapped an RP locus to the chromo
somal location of a new candidate gene at 5q31. One might expect this gene
to encode a polypeptide required for the activity of a(n)
A. receptor tyrosine kinase
B. cGMP phosphodiesterase
C. phospholipase C
D. adenyl cyclase
E. protein kinase C
2. A 27 year old woman with epilepsy has been taking phenytoin to control
her seizures. She is now pregnant, and her physician is considering chang
ing her medication to prevent potential bleeding episodes in the infant.
What biochemical activity might be deficient in the infant if her medication
is continued?
A. Hydroxylation of proline
B. Glucuronidation of bilirubin
C. Reduction of glutathione
D. γ Carboxylation of glutamate
E. Oxidation of lysine
3. A 75 year old woman is seen in the emergency room with a fractured arm.
Physical examination revealed multiple bruises and perifollicular hemor
rhages, periodontitis, and painful gums. Her diet consists predominately of
weak coffee, bouillon, rolls, and plain pasta. Lab results indicated mild
microcytic anemia. Which of the following enzymes should be less active
than normal in this patient?
A. Homocysteine methyltransferase
B. γ Glutamyl carboxylase
C. Dihydrofolate reductase
D. ALA synthase
E. Prolyl hydroxylase
15
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Answers
1. Answer: B. Only phosphodiesterase participates as a signaling molecule in
the visual cycle of photoreceptor cells.
MedicalGenetics
2. Answer: D. Phenyl hydantoins decrease the activity of vitamin K, which is
required for the γ carboxylation of coagulation factors (II, VII, IX, X), as
well as proteins C and S.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences 3. Answer: E. The patient has many signs of scurvy from a vitamin C
deficiency. The diet, which contains no fruits or vegetables, provides little
vitamin C. Prolyl hydroxylase requires vitamin C, and in the absence of
hydroxylation, the collagen α chains do not form stable, mature collagen.
The anemia may be due to poor iron absorption in the absence of
ascorbate.
15
11 #
Energy Metabolism
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Explain information related to metabolic sources of energy
❏ Interpret scenarios about metabolic energy storage and fuel metabolism
❏ Answer questions about patterns of fuel metabolism in tissues
METABOLIC SOURCES OF ENERGY
Energy is extracted from food via oxidation, resulting in the end products carbon
dioxide and water. This process occurs in 4 stages.
In stage 1, metabolic fuels are hydrolyzed in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract to a
diverse set of monomeric building blocks (glucose, amino acids, and fatty acids)
and absorbed.
In stage 2, the building blocks are degraded by various pathways in tissues to a
common metabolic intermediate, acetyl CoA.
• Most of the energy contained in metabolic fuels is conserved in the
chemical bonds (electrons) of acetyl CoA.
• A smaller portion is conserved in reducing nicotinamide adenine dinucle
otide (NAD) to NADH or flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) to FADH2.
• Reduction indicates the addition of electrons that may be free, part of a
hydrogen atom (H), or a hydride ion (H–).
In stage 3, the citric acid (Krebs, or tricarboxylic acid [TCA]) cycle oxidizes acetyl
CoA to CO2. The energy released in this process is primarily conserved by
reducing NAD to NADH or FAD to FADH2.
The final stage is oxidative phosphorylation, in which the energy of NADH and
FADH2 is released via the electron transport chain (ETC) and used by an ATP
synthase to produce ATP. This process requires O2.
15
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Carbohydrate Protein Fat
Stage
I Glucose Amino acids Fatty acids
MedicalGenetics
Pyruvate
II Acetyl CoA
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
III TCA
Cycle
2 CO2
3 NADH & FADH2
O
IV ETC
e–H2O
ATP synthase
ADP + Pi ATP
Figure FiguIre11 I 111. E1n.ergEynergy frformom MetaMbeotlaicbolic Fuels Fuels
METABOLIC ENERGY STORAGE
ATP is a form of circulating energy currency in cells. It is formed in catabolic
pathways by phosphorylation of ADP and may provide energy for biosynthesis
(anabolic pathways). There is a limited amount of ATP in circulation. Most of
the excess energy from the diet is stored as fatty acids (a reduced polymer of
acetyl CoA) and glycogen (a polymer of glucose). Although proteins can be
mobilized for energy in a prolonged fast, they are normally more important
for other functions (contractile elements in muscle, enzymes, intracellular
matrix, etc.).
In addition to energy reserves, many other types of biochemicals are required to
maintain an organism. Cholesterol is required for cell membrane structure,
proteins for muscle contraction, and polysaccharides for the intracellular matrix,
to name just a few examples. These substances may be produced from transformed
dietary components.
REGULATION OF FUEL METABOLISM
The pathways that are operational in fuel metabolism depend on the nutritional
status of the organism. Shifts between storage and mobilization of a particular fuel,
as well as shifts among the types of fuel being used, are very pronounced in going
from the well fed state to an overnight fast, and finally to a prolonged state of
starvation. The shifting metabolic patterns are regulated mainly by the insulin/
glucagon ratio. Insulin is an anabolic hormone which promotes fuel storage.
Its action is opposed by a number of hormones, including glucagon, epinephrine,
160
CHAPTER 11 | ENERGY METABOLISM
cortisol, and growth hormone. The major function of glucagon is to respond
rapidly to decreased blood glucose levels by promoting the synthesis and release of
glucose into the circulation.
Anabolic and catabolic pathways are controlled at 3 important levels:
• Allosteric inhibitors and activators of rate limiting enzymes
HY HY
• Control of gene expression by insulin and glucagon
MY MY
• Phosphorylation (glucagon) and dephosphorylation (insulin) of rate limit
ing enzymes LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Well Fed (Absorptive) State
Immediately after a meal, the blood glucose level rises and stimMuElaDteIsUM tYheIELDrelease MEDIUM YIELD
of insulin. The 3 major target tissues for insulin are liver, muscle, and adipose
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
tissue. Insulin promotes glycogen synthesis in liver and muscle. After the
glycogen stores are filled, the liver converts excess glucose to fatty acids and
triglycerides. Insulin promotes triglyceride synthesis in adipose tissue and
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
protein synthesis in muscle, as well as glucose entry into both tissues. After a
meal, most of the energy needs of the liver are met by the oxidationREINFORCEofMENeTxcess REINFORCEMENT
amino acids.
Two tissues—brain and red blood cells—are insensitive to insulin (are insulin
HY HY
independent). The brain and other nerves derive energy from oxidizing glucose to
CO2 and water in both the well fed and normal fasting states. Only in prolongeMdY MY
fasting does this situation change. Under all conditions, red blood cells use glucose
anaerobically for all their energy needs. LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Postabsorptive State
Glucagon and epinephrine levels rise during an overnight fast. MTEhDeIsUeM hormoYnIeEsLD MEDIUM YIELD
exert their effects on skeletal muscle, adipose tissue, and liver. In liver, glycogen
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
degradation and the release of glucose into the blood are stimulated. Hepatic
gluconeogenesis is also stimulated by glucagon, but the response is slower than
that of glycogenolysis. The release of amino acids from skeletal muscle and fatty
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
acids from adipose tissue are both stimulated by the decrease in insulin and by an
increase in epinephrine. The amino acids and fatty acids are takenREINFupORCEbyMENthTe liver, REINFORCEMENT
where the amino acids provide the carbon skeletons and the oxidation of fatty
acids provides the ATP necessary for gluconeogenesis.
16
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
MedicalGenetics
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Pyruvate Glucose Glucose
RED
CELL
ATP
Bile Lactate
LIVER
Bile salts Cholesterol
Lactate
Fatty Acetyl
Pyruvate Glucose Glucose
acids CoA
Glycerol P
Urea
CO2
Fat GLYCOGEN
Amino acids Glucose
ATP
Pyruvate
Glycerol VLDL Amino acids
Blood
Fatty
FAT
acids Acetyl
CoA
Chylo Amino
Glycerol P Acetyl microns Acetyl CoA acids PROTEIN CO2
CoA
CO2 ATP
CO2 Pyruvate
Pyruvate ATP
ATP BRAIN
Glucose Glucose Glucose GLYCOGEN
MUSCLE
ADIPOSE TISSUE
Glucose
Figure I 11 2. Metabolic Profile of the Well Fed (Absorptive) State
Figure I 11 2. Metabolic Profile of the Well Fed (Absorptive) State
16
CHAPTER 11 | ENERGY METABOLISM
Pyruvate Glucose
RED
CELL
ATP
Lactate CORI CYCLE
LIVER
Lactate Glycerol P
Fatty Acetyl
Pyruvate Glucose Glucose
acids CoA
CO2
Glycerol P Urea
ATP Glucose
GLYCOGEN
Ketone Alanine
bodies
Glycerol
Pyruvate
Ketone
Fatty Fatty acid bodies Alanine Blood Acetyl
FAT CoA
acids albumins
CO2
Amino
Acetyl Ketone PROTEIN ATP
acids
CoA bodies
Fatty
BRAIN
CO2 acids
ATP
Acetyl CO2
CoA
ATP
ADIPOSE TISSUE MUSCLE
Figure I 11 3. Metabolic Profile of the Postabsorptive State
Figure I 11 3. Metabolic Profile of the Postabsorptive State
16
Immunology
MY
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY LY
Biochemistry
High Yield H
NOTE Prolonged Fast (Starvation)
Carbohydrate (4 kcal/gm) Levels of glucagon and epinephrine are markedly elevated duringMEDIUsMtarvation. YIELD ME
Lipolysis is rapid, resulting in excess acetyl CoA that is used for ketone synthesis.
Protein (4 kcal/gm) LOW YIELD
Levels of both lipids and ketones are therefore increased in the blood. Muscle uses
MedicalGenetics
fatty acids as the major fuel, and the brain adapts to using ketones for some of its
Fat (9 kcal/gm)
energy.
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
Alcohol (7 kcal/gm)
After several weeks of fasting, the brain derives approximately 2/3 of its energy
REINFORCEMENT RE
from ketones and 1/3 from glucose. The shift from glucose to ketones as the major
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
fuel diminishes the amount of protein that must be degraded to support gluconeo
genesis. There is no “energy storage form” for protein because each protein has a
specific function in the cell. Therefore, the shift from using glucose to ketones
during starvation spares protein, which is essential for these other functions. Red
blood cells (and renal medullary cells) that have few, if any,
mitochondria continue to be dependent on glucose for their energy.
NOTE
PATTERNS OF FUEL METABOLISM IN TISSUES
A recommended 2,100 kcal diet consisting
Fats are much more energy rich than carbohydrates, proteins, or ketones. Com
of 58% carbohydrate, 12% protein, and 30% plete combustion of fat results in 9 kcal/g compared with 4 kcal/g derived from
fat content: carbohydrate, protein, and ketones. The storage capacity and pathways for utiliza
tion of fuels varies by organ and nutritional status of the organism as a whole.
305 g of carbohydrate
Table I 11 1. Preferred Fuels in the Well Fed and Fasting States
0.58 × 2,100 kcal = 1,218 kcal
Organ Well Fed Fasting
1,218 kcal/4 kcal/g = 305 g
Liver Glucose and amino Fatty acids
63 g of protein
acids
0.12 × 2,100 = 252 kcal
Resting skeletal Glucose Fatty acids, ketones
muscle
252 kcal/4 kcal/g = 63 g
Cardiac muscle Fatty acids Fatty acids, ketones
70 g of fat
Adipose tissue Glucose Fatty acids
0.30 × 2,100 = 630 kcal
Brain Glucose Glucose (ketones in
630 kcal/9 kcal/g = 70 g
prolonged fast)
Red blood cells Glucose Glucose
Liver
Two major roles of the liver in fuel metabolism are to maintain a constant level of
blood glucose under a wide range of conditions and to synthesize ketones when
excess fatty acids are being oxidized.
• After a meal, the glucose concentration in the portal blood is elevated.
• The liver extracts excess glucose and uses it to replenish its glycogen
stores. Any glucose remaining in the liver is then converted to acetyl CoA
and used for fatty acid synthesis.
16
CHAPTER 11 | ENERGY METABOLISM
• The increase in insulin after a meal stimulates both glycogen synthesis
and fatty acid synthesis in liver. The fatty acids are converted to triglycer
ides and released into the blood as very low density lipoproteins (VLDLs).
In the well fed state, the liver derives most of its energy from the oxidation
of excess amino acids.
• Between meals and during prolonged fasts, the liver releases glucose into
the blood. The increase in glucagon during fasting promotes both glyco
gen degradation and gluconeogenesis.
• Lactate, glycerol, and amino acids provide carbon skeletons for glucose
synthesis.
Adipose Tissue
After a meal, the elevated insulin stimulates glucose uptake by adipose tissue. Insu
lin also stimulates fatty acid release from VLDL and chylomicron triglyceride
(triglyceride is also known as triacylglycerol).
• Lipoprotein lipase, an enzyme found in the capillary bed of adipose tissue,
is induced by insulin.
• The fatty acids that are released from lipoproteins are taken up by adipose
tissue and re esterified to triglyceride for storage.
• The glycerol phosphate required for triglyceride synthesis comes from
glucose metabolized in the adipocyte.
• Insulin is also very effective in suppressing the release of fatty acids from
adipose tissue.
• During the fasting state, the decrease in insulin and the increase in
epinephrine activate hormone sensitive lipase in fat cells, allowing fatty
acids to be released into the circulation.
Recall Question
In a prolonged state of starvation, which of the following is the
major source of energy for muscles?
A. Fatty acids
B. Glucose
C. Glycogen
D. Ketones
Answer: A
16
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Skeletal Muscle
Resting muscle
MedicalGenetics The major fuels of skeletal muscle are glucose and fatty acids. Because of the
enormous bulk, skeletal muscle is the body’s major consumer of fuel. After a meal,
under the influence of insulin, skeletal muscle takes up glucose to replenish
glycogen stores and amino acids that are used for protein synthesis. Both excess
glucose and amino acids can also be oxidized for energy.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
In the fasting state, resting muscle uses fatty acids derived from free fatty acids in
the blood. Ketones may be used if the fasting state is prolonged. In exercise,
skeletal muscle may convert some pyruvate to lactate, which is transported by
blood to be converted to glucose in the liver.
CLINICAL CORRELATE Active muscle
Because insulin is necessary for adipose The primary fuel used to support muscle contraction depends on the magnitude
and duration of exercise as well as the major fibers involved. Skeletal muscle has
cells to take up fatty acids from triglycerides,
stores of both glycogen and some triglycerides. Blood glucose and free fatty acids
high triglyceride levels in the blood may be
also may be used.
an indicator of untreated diabetes.
• Fast twitch muscle fibers have a high capacity for anaerobic glycolysis but
are quick to fatigue. They are involved primarily in short term, high
intensity exercise.
• Slow twitch muscle fibers in arm and leg muscles are well vascularized
and primarily oxidative. They are used during prolonged, low to moderate
intensity exercise and resist fatigue. Slow twitch fibers and the number of
their mitochondria increase dramatically in trained endurance athletes.
• Short bursts of high intensity exercise are supported by anaerobic glycoly
sis drawing on stored muscle glycogen.
• During moderately high, continuous exercise, oxidation of glucose and
fatty acids are both important, but after 1–3 hours of sustained continuous
exercise muscle glycogen stores become depleted and the intensity of
exercise declines to a rate that can be supported by oxidation of fatty acids.
Cardiac Muscle
During fetal life, cardiac muscle primarily uses glucose as an energy source, but in
the postnatal period there is a major switch to β oxidation of fatty acids. Thus, in
humans, fatty acids serve as the major fuel for cardiac myocytes. When ketones are
present during prolonged fasting, they are also used. Thus, not surprisingly,
cardiac myocytes most closely parallel the skeletal muscle during extended periods
of exercise.
In patients with cardiac hypertrophy, this situation reverses to some extent. In the
failing heart, glucose oxidation increases, and β oxidation falls.
16
CHAPTER 11 | ENERGY METABOLISM
Brain
Although the brain represents 2% of total body weight, it obtains 15% of the
cardiac output, uses 20% of total O2, and consumes 25% of the total glucose.
Therefore, glucose is the primary fuel for the brain.
• Blood glucose levels are tightly regulated to maintain the concentration
levels that enable sufficient glucose uptake into the brain via GLUT 1 and
GLUT 3 transporters.
• Because glycogen levels in the brain are minor, normal function depends
upon continuous glucose supply from the bloodstream.
• In hypoglycemic conditions (<70 mg/dL), centers in the hypothalamus
sense a fall in blood glucose level, and the release of glucagon and epi
nephrine is triggered.
• Fatty acids cannot cross the blood–brain barrier and are therefore not
used at all.
• Between meals, the brain relies on blood glucose supplied by either hepatic
glycogenolysis or gluconeogenesis. Only in prolonged fasts does the brain
gain the capacity to use ketones for energy, and even then ketones supply
only approximately 2/3 of the fuel; the remainder is glucose.
16
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Review Questions
Select the ONE best answer.
1. Two weeks after an episode of the flu, an 8 year old boy with IDDM is
MedicalGenetics
brought to the emergency room in a coma. His breathing is rapid and deep,
and his breath has a fruity odor. His blood glucose is 36.5 mM (normal:
4–6 mM [70–110 mg/dL]). The physician administers IV fluids, insulin,
and potassium chloride. A rapid effect of insulin in this situation is to
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences stimulate
A. gluconeogenesis in the liver
B. fatty acid release from adipose
C. glucose transport in muscle
D. ketone utilization in the brain
E. glycogenolysis in the liver
2. A woman with a history of alcohol abuse has been on a 2 week drinking
binge during which time she has eaten little and has become severely hypo
glycemic. Which additional condition may develop in response to chronic,
severe hypoglycemia?
A. Glycogen accumulation in the liver with cirrhosis
B. Thiamine deficiency
C. Ketoacidosis
D. Folate deficiency
E. Hyperuricemia
3. After a routine physical exam and blood work, a woman with a normal
weight for her height was advised that her lipid profile showed an elevation
of blood triglycerides. The doctor advises the patient to lower fat consump
tion which disappoints her since she avidly consumes whole milk. The
woman consults a nutritionist, who states that whole milk is 3.5% fat, which
corresponds to approximately 11 g of fat in an 8 ounce serving. If she
switches to drinking skim milk (nonfat), approximately how many addi
tional grams of carbohydrates should she consume to make up for the loss
of fat in the 8 ounce serving?
A. 5 grams
B. 11 grams
C. 15 grams
D. 25 grams
E. 35 grams
16
CHAPTER 11 | ENERGY METABOLISM
Answers
1. Answer: C. Insulin increases glucose transport in only two tissues, adipose
and muscle. The major site of glucose uptake is muscle, which decreases
hyperglycemia. Glucose and ketone transport and metabolism are insulin
independent in the brain (choice D). Insulin would slow gluconeogenesis
(choice A) and fatty acid release from adipose (choice B). Insulin would
inhibit glycogenolysis in the liver (choice E).
2. Answer: C. Severe hypoglycemia lowers the insulin level and increases
glucagon. This would favor fatty acid release from the adipose and
ketogenesis in the liver.
3. Answer: D. You are expected to know that carbohydrates have 4 Kcal/gram,
proteins have 4 Kcal/gram, fat has 9 Kcal/gram, and alcohol has 7 Kcal/
gram. In this question, 11 grams of fat times 9 Kcal/gram = 99 Kcal which
is rounded to 100 Kcal. Dividing 100 Kcal by 4 Kcal/gram of carbohydrate
is 25 grams.
16

Glycolysis and Pyruvate
12 #
Dehydrogenase
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Answer questions about carbohydrate digestion
❏ Demonstrate understanding of glucose transport
❏ Understand concepts of aerobic and anaerobic glycolysis
❏ Explain information related to galactose metabolism
❏ Explain information related to fructose metabolism
❏ Answer questions about pyruvate dehydrogenase
OVERVIEW
All cells can carry out glycolysis. In a few tissues—most importantly red blood
cells—glycolysis represents the only energy yielding pathway available. Glucose is
the major monosaccharide that enters the pathway, but others such as galactose
and fructose can also be used.
The first steps in glucose metabolism in any cell are transport across the mem
brane and phosphorylation by kinase enzymes inside the cell to prevent it from
leaving via the transporter.
CARBOHYDRATE DIGESTION
Only a very small amount of the total carbohydrates ingested are monosaccha
rides. Most of the carbohydrates in foods are in complex forms, such as starch
(amylose and amylopectin) and the disaccharides sucrose and lactose.
• In the mouth, secreted salivary amylase randomly hydrolyzes the starch
polymers to dextrins (<8–10 glucoses).
• Upon entry of food into the stomach, the acid pH destroys the salivary
amylase.
• In the intestine, the dextrins are hydrolyzed to the disaccharides maltose
and isomaltose.
• Disaccharides in the intestinal brush border complete the digestion process:
– Maltase cleaves maltose to 2 glucoses
– Isomaltase cleaves isomaltose to 2 glucoses
– Lactase cleaves lactose to glucose and galactose
– Sucrase cleaves sucrose to glucose and fructose
Uptake of glucose into the mucosal cells is performed by the sodium/glucose
transporter, an active transport system.
17
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
GLUCOSE TRANSPORT
Glucose entry into most cells is concentration driven and independent of sodium.
There are 4 major glucose transporters (GLUT), each with a different affinity
for glucose coinciding with its respective physiologic role. Normal glucose
MedicalGenetics
concentration in peripheral blood is 4–6 mM (70–110 mg/dL).
• GLUT 1 and GLUT 3 mediate basal glucose uptake in most tissues, includ
ing brain, nerves, and red blood cells. Their high affinities for glucose
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences ensure glucose entry even during periods of relative hypoglycemia. At
normal glucose concentration, GLUT 1 and GLUT 3
are at Vmax.
• GLUT 2, a low affinity transporter, is in hepatocytes. After a meal, portal
blood from the intestine is rich in glucose. GLUT 2 captures the excess
glucose primarily for storage. When the glucose concentration drops
below the Km for the transporter, much of the remainder leaves the liver
and enters the peripheral circulation. In the β islet cells of the pancreas.
GLUT 2, along with glucokinase, serves as the glucose sensor for insulin
release.
BRIDGE TO PHYSIOLOGY
• GLUT 4 is in adipose tissue and muscle, and responds to the glucose
GLUT 4 translocation to the cell membrane
concentration in peripheral blood. The rate of glucose transport in both
in skeletal muscle is stimulated by exercise.
these tissues is increased by insulin, which stimulates the movement of
This effect, which is independent of insulin,
additional GLUT 4 transporters to the membrane by a mechanism
involves a 5′ AMP activated kinase. involving exocytosis.
Decreased insulin decreases the Increased insulin increases the
number of plasma membrane number of plasma membrane
GLUT 4 transporters GLUT 4 transporters
Fusion of
vesicles
Cytoplasmic
with plasma
vesicles with
membrane
membrane bound
GLUT 4 Exocytosis
transporters
Endocytosis
GLUT 4 GLUT 4
Figure I 1F2igure1. IInsu1l2in 1. InsuRleingulatioRnegulation ofof GGlluuccoossee
Transport TrainnsportMusclein Muscalend anAddipoAsdeipose CCeellllss
Although basal transport occurs in all cells independently of insulin, the
transport rate increases in adipose tissue and muscle when insulin levels rise.
Muscle stores excess glucose as glycogen, and adipose tissue requires glucose to
form dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP), which is converted to glycerol
phosphate used to store incoming fatty acids as triglyceride (TGL, 3 fatty acids
attached to glycerol).
17
CHAPTER 12 | GLYCOLYSIS AND PYRUVATE DEHYDROGENASE
Table I 12 1. Major Glucose Transporters in Human Cells
Name Tissues Km, Glucose Functions
GLUT 1 Most tissues ~1 mM Basal uptake of glucose
(brain, red cells)
GLUT 2 Liver Pancreatic ~15 mM Uptake and release of
β cells glucose by the liver β cell
glucose sensor
GLUT 3 Most tissues ~1 mM Basal uptake
GLUT 4 Skeletal muscle ~5 mM Insulin stimulated glucose
uptake; stimulated by
Adipose tissue
exercise in skeletal muscle
Normal blood glucose concentration is 4–6 mM (72–110 mg/dL).
Ca2+
Insulin
Open Ca2+
GLUT 2 channel
Glucose Closed KATP
channel
Ca2+
Depolarization
of membrane NOTE
Glucose
ATPases Glucose induces genetic
Glucokinase Increased ratio expression of the insulin
of ATP to ADP
gene. Insulin secretion by
Glycolysis the pancreatic β cells is
NAD
Citric biphasic. Glucose stimulates
Acid ETC ATP ATP the first phase (within
Cycle NADH 15 minutes) with release of
preformed insulin. The
second phase (several
hours) involves insulin
Mitochondrion synthesis at the gene level.
FigurFeigure II1122 2.2.GLUGTLUT22and GaluncdokinaseGlucokinaTsoegether FuncTtioognether Function
aass ththee GluGcolusceose Sensor SenisnorPancreaticin PanβcreIastliect Cells β Islet Cells
GLYCOLYSIS
Glycolysis is a cytoplasmic pathway that converts glucose into 2 pyruvates, releas
ing a modest amount of energy captured in 2 substrate level phosphorylations and
1 oxidation reaction. If a cell has mitochondria and oxygen, glycolysis is aerobic.
If either mitochondria or oxygen is lacking, glycolysis may occur anaerobically
(erythrocytes, exercising skeletal muscle), although some of the available energy
is lost.
17
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Insulin
*
ATP ADP +
Isomerase
MedicalGenetics PFK–2
Fructose 2,
Glucose Glucose Glucose 6P Fructose 6P
Mg2+ 6 bis
ATP ADP
Transport Hexokinase
ATP
Glucokinase (liver)
*
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences PFK–1 +
ADP
(phosphofructokinase)
Fructose 1, 6 bis P
Aldolase
Dihydroxyacetone P
Glyceraldehyde 3P
(DHAP)
NAD
Isomerase Glycerol 3P
ETC/O2 Pi dehydrogenase
Mitochondria Glyceraldehyde 3P
dehydrogenase
Glycerol 3P
NADH
• TGL synthesis
• Electron shuttle
1,3 Bisphosphoglycerate
(RBC)
ADP
Phosphoglycerate
2,3 Bisphosphoglycerate
ATP kinase
3 Phosphoglycerate
Mutase
2 Phosphoglycerate
Enolase
Pyruvate kinase deficiency
Phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) • Hemolytic anemia
• Increased BPG
*
ADP • No Heinz bodies
Pyruvate kinase
ATP
NAD NADH
–O2
Mitochondria
Cytoplasm +O2 Pyruvate
Pyruvate dehydrogenase
Pyruvate
Acetyl CoA
Lactate Lactate or
dehydrogenase
TCA Fatty acid
synthesis
CO2
ATP
*Controlled enzymes catalyzing irreversible steps
Figure I 12 3. Glycolysis
Figure I 12 3. Glycolysis
174
CHAPTER 12 | GLYCOLYSIS AND PYRUVATE DEHYDROGENASE
Glycolysis also provides intermediates for other pathways. In the liver, it is part of
the process by which excess glucose is converted to fatty acids for storage.
Important enzymes in glycolysis include:
• Hexokinase/glucokinase
– Glucose entering the cell is trapped by phosphorylation using ATP.
– Hexokinase is widely distributed in tissues, whereas glucokinase is
found only in hepatocytes and pancreatic β islet cells.
– Note below the differences in the Km and Vmax values. These coincide
with the differences in Km values for the glucose transporters in these
tissues noted earlier.
Table I 12 2. Comparison of Hexokinase and Glucokinase
Hexokinase Glucokinase
Most tissues Hepatocytes and pancreatic β islet
cells (along with GLUT 2, acts as
the glucose sensor)
Low Km (0.05 mM in erythrocytes) High Km (10 mM)
Inhibited by glucose 6 phosphate Induced by insulin in hepatocytes
• Phosphofructokinases (PFK 1 and PFK 2)
– PFK 1 is the rate limiting enzyme and main control point in glycolysis.
In this reaction, fructose 6 phosphate is phosphorylated to fructose
1,6 bisphosphate using ATP.
– PFK 1 is inhibited by ATP and citrate, and activated by AMP.
– Insulin stimulates and glucagon inhibits PFK 1 in hepatocytes by an
indirect mechanism involving PFK 2 and fructose 2,6 bisphosphate.
– Insulin activates PFK 2 (via the tyrosine kinase receptor and activation
of protein phosphatases), which converts a tiny amount of fructose
6 phosphate to fructose 2,6 bisphosphate (F2,6 BP).
– F2,6 BP activates PFK 1.
– Glucagon inhibits PFK 2 (via cAMP dependent protein kinase A),
lowering F2,6 BP and thereby inhibiting PFK 1.
– PFK 1 is a multi subunit enzyme that demonstrates cooperative NOTE
kinetics. Arsenate inhibits the conversion of
• Glyceraldehyde 3 phosphate dehydrogenase glyceraldehyde 3 phosphate to
1,3 bisphosphoglycerate by mimicking
– Glyceraldehyde 3 phosphate dehydrogenase catalyzes an oxidation and
addition of inorganic phosphate (Pi) to its substrate. This results in the phosphate in the reaction. The arsenate
production of a high energy intermediate 1,3 bisphosphoglycerate and containing product is water labile, enabling
the reduction of NAD to NADH. glycolysis to proceed but resulting in no ATP
– If glycolysis is aerobic, the NADH can be reoxidized (indirectly) by the production.
mitochondrial electron transport chain, providing energy for ATP
synthesis by oxidative phosphorylation.
17
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
• 3 phosphoglycerate kinase
– 3 phosphoglycerate kinase transfers the high energy phosphate from
1,3 bisphosphoglycerate to ADP, forming ATP and 3 phosphoglycerate.
MedicalGenetics – This type of reaction, in which ADP is directly phosphorylated to ATP
using a high energy intermediate, is referred to as a substrate level
phosphorylation.
– Unlike oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria, substrate level
phosphorylations are not dependent on oxygen, and are the only means
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
of ATP generation in an anaerobic tissue.
• Pyruvate kinase
– The last enzyme in aerobic glycolysis, pyruvate kinase catalyzes a
substrate level phosphorylation of ADP using the high energy substrate
phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP).
– Pyruvate kinase is activated by fructose 1,6 bisphosphate from the
PFK 1 reaction (feed forward activation).
• Lactate dehydrogenase
– Lactate dehydrogenase is used only in anaerobic glycolysis. It reoxidizes
NADH to NAD, replenishing the oxidized coenzyme for glyceraldehyde
3 phosphate dehydrogenase.
– Without mitochondria and oxygen, glycolysis would stop when all the
available NAD had been reduced to NADH. By reducing pyruvate to
lactate and oxidizing NADH to NAD, lactate dehydrogenase prevents
this potential problem from developing.
– In aerobic tissues, lactate does not normally form in significant
amounts. However, when oxygenation is poor (skeletal muscle
during strenuous exercise, myocardial infarction), most cellular ATP
is generated by anaerobic glycolysis, and lactate production
increases.
17
CHAPTER 12 | GLYCOLYSIS AND PYRUVATE DEHYDROGENASE
GLUCOSE SENSING IN β ISLET CELLS
Similar to hepatocytes of the liver, β islet cells of the pancreas have GLUT
2 on the plasma membrane to transport glucose into the cells, as well as
glucokinase to trap the incoming glucose as glucose 6 phosphate. Because
both GLUT 2 and glucokinase have high Km values for glucose, glucose is
transported and phosphorylated via first order kinetics (directly proportional
to glucose concentration in the bloodstream).
A 1 day old infant delivered at 34 weeks’ gestation due to intrauterine
growth retardation developed progressive respiratory failure that required
intermittent mechanical ventilation. Her blood glucose was 13.4 mM and
increased to 24.6 mM. Insulin was administered to normalize her glucose.
No C peptide was detectable. Her parents were second cousins. Both had
symptoms of mild diabetes controlled by diet alone. Genetic studies revealed
a missense mutation (Ala378Val) in the glucokinase gene. The parents were
heterozygous, and the infant homozygous, for the mutation. Recombinant
mutant glucokinase showed only 0.02% of the wild type activity.
Near complete deficiency of glucokinase activity is associated with permanent
neonatal type 1 diabetes. Glucokinase deficiency is the problem in this infant.
In contrast to the case above, some mutations in the glucokinase gene alter
the Km for glucose. Those mutations which decrease the Km (increasing the
affinity for glucose) result in hyperinsulinemia and hypoglycemia. Conversely,
mutations which increase the Km (decreasing the affinity for glucose) are
associated with some cases of maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY).
Important intermediates of glycolysis include the following: NOTE
C peptide is a short polypeptide that
• Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) is used in liver and adipose tissue
for triglyceride synthesis. connects the A chain to the B chain in the
proinsulin molecule. It is removed after
• 1,3 bisphosphoglycerate and phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) are high energy
proinsulin is packaged into vesicles in the
intermediates used to generate ATP by substrate level phosphorylation.
Golgi apparatus.
Three enzymes in the pathway catalyze reactions that are irreversible. When the
liver produces glucose, different reactions and thus different enzymes must be used
at these 3 points:
• Glucokinase/hexokinase
• PFK 1
• Pyruvate kinase
17
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Recall Question
Which of the following transporters increases its uptake of glucose
in response to insulin?
MedicalGenetics
A. GLUT 1
B. GLUT 2
C. GLUT 3
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
D. GLUT 4
Answer: D
ATP Production and Electron Shuttles
Anaerobic glycolysis yields 2 ATP/glucose by substrate level phosphorylation.
Aerobic glycolysis yields these 2 ATP/glucose plus 2 NADH/glucose that can be
utilized for ATP production in the mitochondria; however, the inner membrane is
impermeable to NADH.
Cytoplasmic NADH is reoxidized to NAD and delivers its electrons to one of 2
electron shuttles in the inner membrane. In the malate shuttle, electrons are passed
to mitochondrial NADH and then to the electron transport chain. In the glycerol
phosphate shuttle, electrons are passed to mitochondrial FADH2.
• Cytoplasmic NADH oxidized using the malate shuttle produces a mito
chondrial NADH and yields approximately 3 ATP by oxidative phosphor
ylation.
• Cytoplasmic NADH oxidized by the glycerol phosphate shuttle produces
a mitochondrial FADH2 and yields approximately 2 ATP by oxidative
phosphorylation.
Glycolysis in the Erythrocyte
In red blood cells, anaerobic glycolysis represents the only pathway for ATP
production, yielding a net 2 ATP/glucose.
17
CHAPTER 12 | GLYCOLYSIS AND PYRUVATE DEHYDROGENASE
BRIDGE TO PHYSIOLOGY
α α
+ 2,3 bisphosphoglycerate
α α
β β (2,3 BPG) Adaptation to high altitudes (low PO2)
β 2,3 BPG β involves:
HbA
HbA
• Increased respiration
100
• Respiratory alkalosis
saturation
BP
• Lower P50
2,3
• for hemoglobin (initial)
+
50 HbA
O2 • Increased rate of glycolysis
%
• Increased [2,3 BPG] in RBC (12–24
hours)
• Normal P50 for hemoglobin restored by
20 40 60 80 100 120 the increased level of 2,3 BPG
• Increased hemoglobin and hematocrit
pO2 (mm Hg)
(days–weeks)
Figure FiIgur1e2 4I.12Effe4c.tEffect ofof2,32,3 BBiisspphhoosspphhooggllyycceerraattee on Hemogloboinn HemAoglobin A
Erythrocytes have bisphosphoglycerate mutase, which produces 2,3 bispho spho
glycerate (BPG) from 1,3 BPG in glycolysis.
• 2,3 BPG binds to the β chains of hemoglobin A (HbA) and decreases its
affinity for oxygen.
• This effect of 2,3 BPG is seen in the oxygen dissociation curve for HbA.
The rightward shift in the curve is sufficient to allow unloading of oxygen
in tissues, but still allows 100% saturation in the lungs.
• An abnormal increase in erythrocyte 2,3 BPG might shift the curve far
enough so HbA is not fully saturated in the lungs.
• Although 2,3 BPG binds to HbA, it does not bind well to HbF (α2γ2), with CLINICAL CORRELATE
the result that HbF has a higher affinity for oxygen than maternal HbA,
Transfused blood has lower than the
allowing transplacental passage of oxygen from mother to fetus.
expected 2,3 BPG levels, making it less
Pyruvate kinase deficiency is the second most common genetic deficiency that efficient at delivering oxygen to peripheral
causes a hemolytic anemia (glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase, G6PDH, is the
tissues.
most common). Characteristics include:
• Chronic hemolysis
• Increased 2,3 BPG and therefore a lower than normal oxygen affinity of
HbA
• Absence of Heinz bodies (Heinz bodies are more characteristic of G6PDH
deficiency)
The red blood cell has no mitochondria and is totally dependent on anaerobic
glycolysis for ATP. In pyruvate kinase deficiency, the decrease in ATP causes the
erythrocyte to lose its characteristic biconcave shape and signals its destruction in
the spleen. In addition, decreased ion pumping by Na+/K+ ATPase results in loss
of ion balance and causes osmotic fragility, leading to swelling and lysis.
179
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
GALACTOSE METABOLISM
Intestine
MedicalGenetics
Lactose
Symptoms of lactase deficiency after
Lactase
ingestion of lactose (milk products) include:
• Diarrhea
• Bloating
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Glucose Galactose
• Cramps
Blood Lens
Aldose reductase
Galactose Galactose Galactitol
If galactose Galactitol trapped in the lens causes
accumulates swelling and cataracts
Liver, Brain
and Other Tissues
Galactokinase deficiency:
ATP • Cataracts early in life
Galactokinase
ADP
Gal 1 P uridyltransferase deficiency:
Galactose 1 P
• Cataracts early in life
• Vomiting, diarrhea following lactose
UDP Glc
UDP Gal Gal 1 P uridyl ingestion
epimerase transferase • Lethargy
UDP Gal
• Liver damage, hyperbilirubinemia
• Intellectual disability
Glucose 1 P
In the well fed state, galactose can enter
glycolysis or contribute to glycogen storage
Glycogen Glucose 6 P
Administration of galactose during hypoglycemia
induces an increase in blood glucose
Glycolysis Glucose
Figure I 12 5. Galactose Metabolism
Figure I 12 5. Galactose Metabolism
An important source of galactose in the diet is the disaccharide lactose present in
milk. Lactose is hydrolyzed to galactose and glucose by lactase associated with the
brush border membrane of the small intestine. Along with other monosaccharides,
galactose reaches the liver through the portal blood.
18
CHAPTER 12 | GLYCOLYSIS AND PYRUVATE DEHYDROGENASE
Once transported into tissues, galactose is phosphorylated (galactokinase),
trapping it in the cell. Galactose 1 phosphate is converted to glucose 1 phosphate
by galactose 1 P uridyltransferase and an epimerase.
Important enzymes to remember are galactokinase and galactose 1 phosphate
uridyltransferase.
• Genetic deficiencies of these enzymes produce galactosemia. Cataracts, a
characteristic finding in patients with galactosemia, result from conver
sion of the excess galactose in peripheral blood to galactitol in the lens of
the eye, which has aldose reductase.
• Accumulation of galactitol in the lens causes osmotic damage and cata
racts.
• The same mechanism accounts for the cataracts in patients with diabetes
because aldose reductase also converts glucose to sorbitol, which causes
osmotic damage.
• Deficiency of galactose 1 phosphate uridyltransferase produces a more
severe disease because, in addition to galactosemia, galactose 1 P accumu
lates in the liver, brain, and other tissues.
GALACTOSEMIA CLINICAL CORRELATE
Lactose Intolerance
Galactosemia is an autosomal recessive trait resulting from a defective gene
encoding galactokinase or galactose 1 P uridyltransferase. There are over Primary lactose intolerance is caused by a
100 heritable mutations that can cause it (incidence 1/60,000 births). Galactose hereditary deficiency of lactase, most commonly
will be present in elevated amounts in the blood and urine and found in persons of Asian and African descent.
can result in decreased glucose synthesis and hypoglycemia. Secondary lactose intolerance can be
precipitated at any age by gastrointestinal
The parents of a 2 week old infant being breastfed returned to the
hospital because the infant frequently vomited, had a persistent fever, disturbances such as celiac sprue, colitis, or
and looked yellow since birth. The physician quickly observed that the viral induced damage to intestinal mucosa,
infant had early hepatomegaly and cataracts. Blood and urine tests were which is why kids with diarrhea should drink
identified elevated sugar (galactose and, to a smaller extent, galactitol) in clear liquids, and not milk.
the blood and urine. The doctor told the parents to bottle feed the infant
Common symptoms of lactose intolerance
with lactose free formula supplemented with sucrose. Subsequently, the
include vomiting, bloating, explosive and
infant improved.
watery diarrhea, cramps, and dehydration.
Galactosemia symptoms often begin around day 3 in a newborn and include
The symptoms can be attributed to bacterial
the hallmark cataracts. Jaundice and hyperbilirubinemia do not resolve if the
fermentation of lactose to a mixture of CH4,
infant is treated with phototherapy. In the galactosemic infant, the liver, which
H2, and small organic acids. The acids are
is the site of bilirubin conjugation, develops cirrhosis. Vomiting and diarrhea
osmotically active and result in the
occur after milk ingestion because although lactose in milk is hydrolyzed
movement of water into the intestinal lumen.
to glucose and galactose by lactase in the intestine, the galactose is not
properly metabolized. Severe bacterial infections (E. coli sepsis) are common Diagnosis is based on a positive hydrogen
in untreated galactosemic infants. Failure to thrive, lethargy, hypotonia, and
breath test after an oral lactose load.
intellectual disability are other common and apparent features. Many U.S.
Treatment is by dietary restriction of milk
states have mandatory screening of newborns for galactosemia. If an infant is
and milk products (except unpasteurized
correctly diagnosed within the first several weeks of life through a newborn
yogurt, which contains active Lactobacillus)
screening heel prick test, formulas containing galactose free carbohydrates are
or by lactase pills.
given. The life expectancy will then be normal with an appropriate diet.
18
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
FRUCTOSE METABOLISM
Intestine
MedicalGenetics
Sucrose Fruits, honey
Sucrase
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Glucose Fructose
Blood
Other tissues phosphorylate
Fructose
fructose slowly through hexokinase
Liver
Fructokinase Fructokinase deficiency
Kidney
is benign
Fructose 1 P
Aldolase B (fructose 1 P
Aldolase B aldolase activity) deficiency:
• Lethargy, vomiting
• Liver damage,
hyperbilirubinemia
DHAP Glyceraldehyde
• Hypoglycemia
• Hyperuricemia,
lactic acidosis
• Renal proximal tubule
Glycolysis defect (Fanconi)
Glycogenesis Glyceraldehyde 3 P
Gluconeogenesis
Figure I 12 6. FruFcitgousree I 12 M6et.abFolriuscmtose Metabolism
NOTE Fructose is found in honey and fruit and as part of the disaccharide sucrose
(common table sugar). Sucrose is hydrolyzed by intestinal brush border
Because dihydroxyacetone phosphate and
sucrase, and the resulting monosaccharides, glucose and fructose, are absorbed
glyceraldehyde (the products of fructose
into the portal blood. The liver phosphorylates fructose and cleaves it into
metabolism) are downstream from the key glyceraldehyde and DHAP. Smaller amounts are metabolized in renal proximal
regulatory and rate limiting enzyme of tubules.
glycolysis (PFK 1), a high fructose drink
Important enzymes to remember are fructokinase and fructose 1 P aldolase
supplies a quick source of energy in both
(aldolase B).
aerobic and anaerobic cells.
• Genetic deficiency of fructokinase is benign and often detected inciden
tally when urine is checked for glucose with a dipstick.
• Fructose 1 phosphate aldolase deficiency is severe because of accumulation
of fructose 1 phosphate in the liver and renal proximal tubules. Symptoms
are reversed after removing fructose and sucrose from the diet. Cataracts
are not a feature of this disease because fructose is not an aldose sugar and
therefore not a substrate for aldose reductase in the lens.
18
CHAPTER 12 | GLYCOLYSIS AND PYRUVATE DEHYDROGENASE
HEREDITARY FRUCTOSE INTOLERANCE
Hereditary fructose intolerance is an autosomal recessive disease (incidence
1/20,000) due to a defect in the gene that encodes aldolase B in fructose
metabolism. In the absence of the enzyme, fructose challenge results in
an accumulation of fructose 1 phosphate in hepatocytes and thereby
sequestering of inorganic phosphate in this substance. The drop in phosphate
levels prevents its use in other pathways, such as glycogen breakdown
and gluconeogenesis. Eventually, the liver becomes damaged due to the
accumulation of trapped fructose 1 phosphate.
A 4 month old infant was breastfed and developing normally. The
mother decided to begin the weaning process and started to feed the
baby with fruit juices. Within a few weeks, the child became lethargic
and yellow skinned, vomited frequently, and had frequent diarrhea. The
mother thought that the child might have had a food allergy and took the
child to a clinic for testing. It found that the child had sugar in the urine
but did not react with the glucose dipsticks.
If diagnosed early to alleviate complications, a person with fructose
intolerance on a diet that excludes fructose and sucrose will develop normally
and have a normal lifespan. However, complete exclusion of these sugars is
difficult, especially with their widespread use as nutrients and sweeteners.
Failure to correct the diet and prolonged fructose ingestion could eventually
lead to proximal renal disorder resembling Fanconi syndrome.
PYRUVATE DEHYDROGENASE
Pyruvate from aerobic glycolysis enters mitochondria, where it may be converted
to acetyl CoA for entry into the citric acid cycle if ATP is needed, or for fatty acid
synthesis if sufficient ATP is present. The pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH)
reaction is irreversible and cannot be used to convert acetyl CoA to pyruvate or
to glucose. PDH in the liver is activated by insulin, whereas in the brain and
nerves the enzyme (actually, a complex of 5 enzymatic activities) is not responsive
to hormones.
18
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Glucose
GLYCOLYSIS
MedicalGenetics
Pyruvate
CoA
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences NAD – NADH
Pyruvate dehydrogenase – ATP
NADH + Calcium
–
CO2
Acetyl CoA
CITRIC ACID FATTY ACID
CYCLE SYNTHESIS
CO2 + H2O Fatty acids
Figure I 12 7. Pyruvate Dehydrogenase
Figure I 12 7. Pyruvate Dehydrogenase
Cofactors and coenzymes used by pyruvate dehydrogenase include:
• Thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) from the vitamin thiamine
• Lipoic acid
• Coenzyme A (CoA) from pantothenate
• FAD(H2) from riboflavin
• NAD(H) from niacin (some may be synthesized from tryptophan)
Pyruvate dehydrogenase is inhibited by its product acetyl CoA. This control is
important in several contexts and should be considered along with pyruvate
carboxylase, the other mitochondrial enzyme that uses pyruvate (introduced in
gluconeogenesis, Chapter 14).
18
MY MY
CHAPTER LY 12 | GLYCOLYSIS AND PYRUVATLYE DEHYDROGENASE
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Thiamine Deficiency
Thiamine deficiency is commonly seen in patients who abuse aMlcEoDhoIlU,M sincYeIELD MEDIUM YIELD
alcohol interferes with thiamine absorption from the intestine. Patients may
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
develop a complex of symptoms associated with Wernicke peripheral neuropathy
and Korsakoff psychosis. Symptoms include:
• Ataxia FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
• Ophthalmoplegia, nystagmus REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
• Memory loss and confabulation
• Cerebral hemorrhage
Congestive heart failure may be a complication (wet beriberi) owing to inadequate CLINICAL CORRELATE
ATP and accumulation of ketoacids in the cardiac muscle.
If thiamine deficiency is suspected, give IV
Similar to pyruvate dehydrogenase, 2 enzyme complexes use thiamine: thiamine prior to glucose (dextrose)
administration (to prevent lactic acidosis).
• α ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (citric acid cycle)
• Branched chain ketoacid dehydrogenase (metabolism of branched chain
amino acids)
Thiamine deficiency significantly impairs glucose oxidation, causing highly
aerobic tissues (e.g., brain and cardiac muscle) to fail first. In addition, branched
chain amino acids are sources of energy in brain and muscle.
18
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Review Questions
Select the ONE best answer.
1. A 10 month old child is being evaluated for the underlying cause of a
MedicalGenetics
hemolytic anemia. In the diagram below, the oxygen dissociation curve for
hemoglobin in his erythrocytes is compared with the curve obtained with
normal red cells.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Normal
100
Saturatio
50 Patient
%
40 80 120
pO2 (mm Hg)
Figure SQ XII 1
A deficiency of which enzyme is most likely to account for the hemolytic
anemia in this patient?
A. Glucokinase
B. Glucose 6 P dehydrogenase
C. Pyruvate carboxylase
D. Glutathione reductase
E. Pyruvate kinase
2. A breast fed infant begins to vomit frequently and lose weight. Several days
later she is jaundiced, her liver is enlarged, and cataracts are noticed in her
lenses. These symptoms are most likely caused by a deficiency of
A. galactose 1 P uridyltransferase
B. lactase
C. glucose 6 phosphatase
D. galactokinase
E. aldolase B
186
CHAPTER 12 | GLYCOLYSIS AND PYRUVATE DEHYDROGENASE
3. Following an early morning run, a 29 year old man consumes an all
American breakfast consisting of cereal, eggs, bacon, sausage, pancakes
with maple syrup, doughnuts, and coffee with cream and sugar. Which of
the following proteins will most likely be activated in his liver after break
fast?
A. Cytoplasmic PEP carboxykinase
B. Plasma membrane GLUT 4 transporter
C. Cytoplasmic phosphofructokinase 2
D. Mitochondrial carnitine transporter
E. Cytoplasmic glycogen phosphorylase
Items 4 and 5
A 55 year old man with a history of alcohol abuse was brought to the emergency
department by his friends. During their usual nightly gathering at the local bar, he
had passed out and they had been unable to revive him. The physician ordered an
injection of thiamine followed by overnight parenteral glucose. The next morning
the patient was alert and coherent, serum thiamine was normal, and blood
glucose was 73 mg/dL (4 mM). The IV line was removed and he was taken home.
4. Which of the following enzymes is thiamine dependent and essential for
glucose oxidation in the brain?
A. Transketolase
B. Transaldolase
C. Succinyl CoA thiokinase
D. Acetyl CoA carboxylase
E. Pyruvate dehydrogenase
5. At the time of discharge from the hospital, which of the following proteins
would have no significant physiologic activity in this patient?
A. Malate dehydrogenase
B. Glucokinase
C. α Ketoglutarate dehydrogenase
D. GLUT 1 transporter
E. Phosphofructokinase 1
18
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Answers
1. Answer: E. A right shift in the O2 binding curve is indicative of abnormally
elevated 2,3 BPG secondary to a defect in red cell anaerobic glycolysis.
MedicalGenetics Only pyruvate kinase participates in this pathway.
2. Answer: A. Cataracts + liver disease in a milk fed infant = classic
galactosemia.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences 3. Answer: C. Only PFK 2 will be insulin activated in the postprandial period.
4. Answer: E. Most important TPP dependent enzymes include pyruvate
dehydrogenase, α ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, and transketolase.
Transketolase is in the HMP shunt and is not strictly essential for glucose
oxidation.
5. Answer: B. After an overnight fast (plasma glucose 73 mg/dL), the liver is
producing glucose and glucokinase activity would be insignificant (high
Km, low insulin). The other proteins would be needed for aerobic glucose
oxidation in the brain or for hepatic gluconeogenesis.
18
Citric Acid Cycle and
13 #
Oxidative Phosphorylation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Solve problems concerning citric acid cycle
❏ Explain information related to electron transport chain
❏ Understand concepts of oxidative phosphorylation
CITRIC ACID CYCLE
The citric acid cycle (also called Krebs cycle or tricarboxylic acid cycle), is in the
mitochondria. Although oxygen is not directly required in the cycle, the pathway
will not occur anaerobically because NADH and FADH2 will accumulate if oxygen
is not available for the electron transport chain.
The primary function of the cycle is oxidation of acetyl CoA to carbon dioxide.
The energy released from this oxidation is saved as NADH, FADH2, and guanosine
triphosphate (GTP). The overall result of the cycle is represented by the following
reaction:
Acetyl CoA 2 CO2
3 NAD + FAD + GDP + Pi 3 NADH + FADH2 + GTP
Notice that none of the intermediates of the citric acid cycle appear in this
reaction, not as reactants or as products. This emphasizes an important (and
frequently misunderstood) point about the cycle.
• It does not represent a pathway for the net conversion of acetyl CoA to
citrate, to malate, or to any other intermediate of the cycle.
• The only fate of acetyl CoA in this pathway is its oxidation to CO2.
• Thus, the citric acid cycle does not represent a pathway by which there can
be net synthesis of glucose from acetyl CoA.
The cycle is central to the oxidation of any fuel that yields acetyl CoA, including
glucose, fatty acids, ketone bodies, ketogenic amino acids, and alcohol. There is no
hormonal control of the cycle, as activity is necessary irrespective of the fed or
fasting state. Control is exerted by the energy status of the cell through allosteric
activation or deactivation. Many enzymes are subject to negative feedback.
18
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
In the citric acid cycle, all the enzymes are in the matrix of the mitochondria
except succinate dehydrogenase, which is in the inner membrane.
Key points:
MedicalGenetics
• Isocitrate dehydrogenase, the major control enzyme, is inhibited by
NADH and ATP and activated by ADP.
• α ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, like pyruvate dehydrogenase, is a multien
zyme complex. It requires thiamine, lipoic acid, CoA, FAD, and NAD.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Lack of thiamine slows oxidation of acetyl CoA in the citric acid cycle.
• Succinyl CoA synthetase (succinate thiokinase) catalyzes a substrate level
phosphorylation of GDP to GTP.
• Succinate dehydrogenase is on the inner mitochondrial membrane, where
it also functions as complex II of the electron transport chain.
• Citrate synthase condenses the incoming acetyl group with oxaloacetate to
form citrate.
NOTE
Glucose
GTP is energetically equivalent to ATP: Pyruvate Amino acids
GTP + ADP ↔ GDP + ATP PDH
is catalyzed by nucleoside diphosphate Fatty acids
kinase. Acetyl CoA Ketones (extrahepatic)
Alcohol
Citrate
synthase Fatty acid
synthesis
Oxaloacetate Citrate
(citrate shuttle)
cis Aconitase
Malate
dehydrogenase NADH
Isocitrate
NAD
NAD
Gluconeo Isocitrate
Malate
genesis dehydrogenase
NADH CO2
Fumarase
α Ketoglutarate
Urea
Fumarate NAD α Ketoglutarate
cycle
FADH2 dehydrogenase
NADH
Succinate
CO2
dehydrogenase FAD
Succinyl CoA
(complex II) GTP GDP + Pi
Succinate
Odd carbon
Heme
Succinyl CoA fatty acids
synthesis
synthetase
Figure I F13igure1. ICi1tr3ic 1. CAitcriidc AciCdycleCycle
19
CHAPTER 13 | CITRIC ACID CYCLE AND OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION
Several intermediates of the cycle may serve other functions:
• Citrate may leave the mitochondria (citrate shuttle) to deliver acetyl CoA
into the cytoplasm for fatty acid synthesis.
• Succinyl CoA is a high energy intermediate that can be used for heme
synthesis and to activate ketone bodies in extrahepatic tissues.
• Malate can leave the mitochondria (malate shuttle) for gluconeogenesis.
When intermediates are drawn out of the citric acid cycle, the cycle slows. There
fore, when intermediates leave the cycle they must be replaced to ensure sufficient
energy for the cell.
ELECTRON TRANSPORT CHAIN
AND OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION
The mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC) carries out 2 reactions:
NADH + O2 NAD + H2O ΔG = -56 kcal/mol
FADH2 + O2 FAD + H2O ΔG = -42 kcal/mol
Although the value of ∆G should not be memorized, it does indicate the large
amount of energy released by both reactions. The electron transport chain is a
device to capture this energy in a form useful for doing work.
Pathways
Sources of NADH, FADH2, and O2
Many enzymes in the mitochondria—including those of the citric acid cycle and
NADH NAD
pyruvate dehydrogenase—produce NADH, all of which can be oxidized in the
electron transport chain and in the process, capture energy for ATP synthesis by
oxidative phosphorylation.
• If NADH is produced in the cytoplasm, the malate or α glycerol phos
phate shuttle can transfer the electrons into the mitochondria for delivery e–e–e–e–Flow of
to the ETC. ETC electricity
• Once NADH has been oxidized, the NAD can again be used by enzymes
that require it.
FADH2 is produced by succinate dehydrogenase in the citric acid cycle and by the
O2 H2O
α glycerol phosphate shuttle. Both enzymes are located in the inner membrane
and can reoxidize FADH2 directly by transferring electrons into the ETC. Once
FADH2 has been oxidized, the FAD can be made available once again for use by
Delivered by
the enzyme.
hemoglobin
O2 is delivered to tissues by hemoglobin. The majority of oxygen required in a
tissue is consumed in the ETC. Its function is to accept electrons at the end of the FigFuirgeure II13132. 2E.lectrOonverviewTransport ofChatihne
chain, and the water formed is added to the cellular water. Electron Transport Chain
19
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
MITOCHONDRIAL CYTOPLASM SIDE
MATRIX (INTERMEMBRANE SPACE)
MedicalGenetics
INNER
MEMBRANE
NADH Barbiturates
NADH – Rotenone (an insecticide)
H+
Pathways Dehydrogenase
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Complex I
NAD+
Succinate e –
Dehydrogenase
Glycerol P
FADH2 e – e –
Shuttle
Complex II
e – FADH2
Fatty Acyl
H+
CoA Coenzyme Q
H+ H+ H+
Dehydrogenase (ubiquinone)
H+
FADH2 Proton H+ H+
e –
Gradient
H+ H+
Cyto b/c1 H+ H+
H+ Complex III H+ H+
(Fe) H+
e –
cyt
C
e –
O2 Cyto a/a3 (Cu+)
Complex IV
H+
Cytochrome
Oxidase (Fe) – Cyanide
H2O
C
H+
F0
F1
– Oligomycin
ATP Synthase
Pi
ADP ATP
ATP
ATP/ADP
translocase
ADP Pi
Uncouplers
H+ + 2,4 DNP 2,4 DNP + H+
Energy lost as Aspirin (high doses)
heat without Thermogenin
ATP synthesis (brown adipose)
Figure I 13 3. Oxidative Phosphorylation
Figure I 13 3. Oxidative Phosphorylation
192
CHAPTER 13 | CITRIC ACID CYCLE AND OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION
Capturing Chemical Energy as Electricity
The mitochondrial electron transport chain works like a chemical battery. In one
location, an oxidation reaction is poised to release electrons at very high energy;
in another location, a potential electron acceptor waits to be reduced. Because
the 2 components are physically separated, nothing happens. Once the 2 termi
nals of the battery are connected by a wire, electrons flow from one compartment
to the other through the wire, producing an electrical current or electricity. A
HY HY
light bulb or an electrical pump inserted into the circuit will run on the electric
ity generated. If no electrical device is in the circuit, all the energy is releasedMY as MY
heat. The mitochondrial electron transport chain operates according to the same
principle. LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Electron Transport Chain
NADH is oxidized by NADH dehydrogenase (complex I), deliveriMngEDIUM its eYleIEctLroDns MEDIUM YIELD
into the chain and returning as NAD to enzymes that require it. The electrons are
LOW YIELD LOW YIEL
passed along a series of protein and lipid carriers that serve as the wire.
These include, in order:
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
• NADH dehydrogenase (complex I) accepts electrons from NADH
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
• Coenzyme Q (a lipid) Matrix
• Cytochrome b/c1 (an Fe/heme protein; complex III)
• Cytochrome c (an Fe/heme protein) Figure I 13 4. Mitochondrion
Figure I 13 4. Mitochondrion
• Cytochrome a/a3 (a Cu/heme protein; cytochrome oxidase, complex IV)
transfers electrons to oxygen
All these components are in the inner membrane of the mitochondria as shown
below. Succinate dehydrogenase and the α glycerol phosphate shuttle enzymes
reoxidize their FADH2 and pass electrons directly to CoQ.
Proton Gradient
The electricity generated by the ETC is used to run proton pumps (translocators),
which drive protons from the matrix space across the inner membrane into the
intermembrane space, creating a small proton (or pH) gradient. This is similar to
pumping any ion, such as Na+, across a membrane to create a gradient. The 3
major complexes I, III, and IV (NADH dehydrogenase, cytochrome b/c1, and
cytochrome a/a3) all translocate protons in this way as the electricity passes
through them.
HY HY
The end result is that a proton gradient is normally maintained across the
mitochondrial inner membrane. If proton channels open, the protons run MbYack MY
into the matrix. Such proton channels are part of the oxidative phosphorylation
complex. LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Oxidative Phosphorylation BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY
ATP synthesis by oxidative phosphorylation uses the energy ofMEthDeIUMproton YIELgDradient AgenetiMcEDIUMdefect YinIELoDxidative phosphorylation
and is carried out by the F0F1 ATP synthase complex, which spans the inner is one cause of Leigh syndrome, a rare
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
membrane. As protons flow into the mitochondria through the F0 component,
neurological disorder.
their energy is used by the F1 component (ATP synthase) to phosphorylate ADP
using Pi.
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
193
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry HY
On average, when an NADH is oxidized in the ETC, sufficient energy is contrib
uted to the proton gradient for the phosphorylation of 3 ATP by F0F1 ATP MY
synthase. FADH2 oxidation provides enough energy for approximately 2 ATP.
These figures are referred to as the P/O ratios. LY
MedicalGenetics
High Yield H
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY Tissue Hypoxia
Ischemic Chest Pain Hypoxia deprives the ETC of sufficient oxygen, decreasing the MrEatDeIUMof ETCYIELDand ME
ATP production. When ATP levels fall, glycolysis increases and, in the absence of
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Patients with chest pain whose symptoms oxygen, will produce lactate (lactic acidosis). Anaerobic glycolysis is LnOoWt abYleIELDto
are suggestive of acute myocardial infarction
meet the demand of most tissues for ATP, especially in highly aerobic tissues like
(AMI) are evaluated by electrocardiogram nerves and cardiac muscle. HY
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
and serial cardiac enzymes. Although
In a myocardial infarction (MI), myocytes swell as the membrane potential MY
myocardial specific CK MB has been used as REINFORCEMENT RE
collapses and the cell gets leaky. Enzymes are released from the damaged tissue,
an early indicator of an AMI, troponin levels and lactic acidosis contributes to protein precipitation and coagulation necrosis. LY
are rapidly replacing it.
Troponin Iand troponin T are sensitive and High Yield H
Inhibitors
specific markers that appear 3–6 hours after
The ETC is coupled to oxidative phosphorylation so that their MacEtDivIiUtieMs rYisIeELD and ME
the onset of symptoms, peak by 16 hours,
fall together. Inhibitors of any step effectively inhibit the whole coupled process,
and remain elevated for nearly a week. In LOW YIELD
resulting in:
the absence of ST segment elevation on the
• Decreased oxygen consumption
EKG, elevated troponin I and troponin T are
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
useful indicators for those at high risk for • Increased intracellular NADH/NAD and FADH2/FAD ratios
evolving myocardial infarction. LDH isozyme • Decreased ATP REINFORCEMENT RE
analysis may be helpful if a patient reports
Important inhibitors include cyanide and carbon monoxide.
chest pain that occurred several days
previously because this change
Cyanide is a deadly poison because it binds irreversibly to cytochrome a/a3,
(LDH1 > LDH2) peaks 2–3 days following preventing electron transfer to oxygen, and producing many of the same changes
an AMI. seen in tissue hypoxia. Sources of cyanide include:
• Burning polyurethane (foam stuffing in furniture and mattresses)
• Byproduct of nitroprusside (released slowly; thiosulfate can be used to
destroy the cyanide)
Nitrites may be used as an antidote for cyanide poisoning if given rapidly. They
convert hemoglobin to methemoglobin, which binds cyanide in the blood before
reaching the tissues. Oxygen is also given, if possible.
Carbon monoxide binds to cytochrome a/a3 but less tightly than cyanide. It also
binds to hemoglobin, displacing oxygen. Symptoms include headache, nausea,
tachycardia, and tachypnea. Lips and cheeks turn a cherry red color. Respiratory
depression and coma result in death if not treated by giving oxygen. Sources of
carbon monoxide include:
• Propane heaters and gas grills
• Vehicle exhaust
• Tobacco smoke
• House fires
• Methylene chloride–based paint strippers
19
CHAPTER 13 | CITRIC ACID CYCLE AND OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION
Other inhibitors include antimycin (cytochrome b/c1), doxorubicin (CoQ), and
oligomycin (F0).
Uncouplers are chemicals that decrease the proton gradient, causing: BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
• Decreased ATP synthesis Aspirin in high doses used to treat
rheumatoid arthritis can result in uncoupling
• Increased oxygen consumption
of oxidative phosphorylation, increased
• Increased oxidation of NADH
oxygen consumption, depletion of hepatic
Because the rate of the ETC increases, with no ATP synthesis, energy is released as glycogen, and the pyretic effect of toxic
heat. Important uncouplers include 2,4 dinitrophenol (2,4 DNP) and aspirin (and doses of salicylate. Depending on the degree
other salicylates). Brown adipose tissue contains a natural uncoupling protein of salicylate intoxication, symptoms can vary
(UCP, formerly called thermogenin), which allows energy loss as heat to maintain
from tinnitus to pronounced CNS and acid
a basal temperature around the kidneys, neck, breastplate, and scapulae in
base disturbance.
newborns.
Recall Question
Which of the following substrates is used in heme synthesis?
A. Citrate
B. Fumarate
C. Succinate
HY HY
D. Succinyl CoA
MY MY
Answer: D
LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Reactive Oxygen Species
When molecular oxygen (O2) is partially reduced, unstable produMcEtsDIUM calledYIELD MEDIUM YIELD
reactive oxygen species (ROS) are formed. These react rapidly with lipids to cause
peroxidation, with proteins, and with other substrates, resulting in deLnaOtuWrationYIELD LOW YIELD
and precipitation in tissues. Reactive oxygen species include:
• Superoxide (O2· ) FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
• Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
• Hydroxyl radical (OH.)
The polymorphonuclear neutrophil produces these substances to kill bacteria in
the protective space of the phagolysosome during the oxidative burst accompany
ing phagocytosis. Production of these same ROS can occur at a slower rate
wherever there is oxygen in high concentration. Small quantities of ROS are
inevitable by products of the electron transport chain in mitochondria. These
small quantities are normally destroyed by protective enzymes such as catalase.
The rate of ROS production can increase dramatically under certain conditions,
such as reperfusion injury in a tissue that has been temporarily deprived of
oxygen. ATP levels will be low and NADH levels high in a tissue deprived of
oxygen (as in an MI). When oxygen is suddenly introduced, there is a burst of
activity in the ETC, generating incompletely reduced ROS.
19
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Defenses against ROS accumulation are particularly important in highly aerobic
tissues and include superoxide dismutase and catalase. In the special case of
erythrocytes, large amounts of superoxide are generated by the spontaneous
dissociation of the oxygen from hemoglobin (occurrence is 0.5–3% of the total
MedicalGenetics hemoglobin per day). The products are methemoglobin and superoxide. The
processes that adequately detoxify the superoxide require a variety of enzymes and
compounds, including superoxide dismutase, catalase, as well as glutathione
peroxidase, vitamin E in membranes, and vitamin C in the cytoplasm. Low levels
of any of these detoxifying substances result in hemolysis. For example, inadequate
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
production of NADPH in glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency results in
accumulation of the destructive hydrogen peroxide (Chapter 14).
Coordinate Regulation of the Citric Acid Cycle and
Oxidative Phosphorylation
The rates of oxidative phosphorylation and the citric acid cycle are closely coordi
nated, and are dependent mainly on the availability of O2 and ADP.
• If O2 is limited, the rate of oxidative phosphorylation decreases, and the
concentrations of NADH and FADH2 increase. The accumulation of
NADH, in turn, inhibits the citric acid cycle. The coordinated regulation
of these pathways is known as “respiratory control.”
• If O2 is adequate, the rate of oxidative phosphorylation depends on the
availability of ADP. The concentrations of ADP and ATP are reciprocally
related; an accumulation of ADP is accompanied by a decrease in ATP and
the amount of energy available to the cell.
– Therefore, ADP accumulation signals the need for ATP synthesis.
– ADP allosterically activates isocitrate dehydrogenase, thereby increas
ing the rate of the citric acid cycle and the production of NADH and
FADH2. Elevated levels of these reduced coenzymes, in turn, increase
the rate of electron transport and ATP synthesis.
19
CHAPTER 13 | CITRIC ACID CYCLE AND OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION
Review Questions
Select the ONE best answer.
1. During a myocardial infarction, the oxygen supply to an area of the heart is
dramatically reduced, forcing the cardiac myocytes to switch to anaerobic
metabolism. Under these conditions, which of the following enzymes would
be activated by increasing intracellular AMP?
A. Succinate dehydrogenase
B. Phosphofructokinase 1
C. Glucokinase
D. Pyruvate dehydrogenase
E. Lactate dehydrogenase
Items 2 and 3
A 40 year old African American man is seen in the emergency room for a severe
headache. His blood pressure is 180/110 mm Hg, and he has evidence of retinal
hemorrhage. An infusion of nitroprusside is given.
2. Which of the following enzymes is affected most directly by the active
metabolite of this drug?
A. Phospholipase A2
B. Cyclic AMP phosphodiesterase
C. Guanylate cyclase
D. Cyclic GMP phosphodiesterase
E. Phospholipase C
3. When nitroprusside is given in higher than usual doses, it may be accompa
nied by the administration of thiosulfate to reduce potential toxic side
effects. Which complex associated with electron transport or oxidative
phosphorylation is most sensitive to the toxic byproduct that may accumu
late with high doses of nitroprusside?
A. NADH dehydrogenase
B. Succinate dehydrogenase
C. Cytochrome b/c1
D. Cytochrome a/a3
E. F0F1 ATP synthase
19
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
4. A patient has been exposed to a toxic compound that increases the permea
bility of mitochondrial membranes for protons. Which of the following
events in liver cells would you expect to occur?
A. Increased ATP levels
MedicalGenetics
B. Increased F1F0 ATP synthase activity
C. Increased oxygen utilization
D. Decreased malate aspartate shuttle activity
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences E. Decreased pyruvate dehydrogenase activity
Items 5 and 6
F. Citrate shuttle
G. Glycerolphosphate shuttle
H. Malate aspartate shuttle
I. Carnitine shuttle
J. Adenine nucleotide shuttle
5. Required for cholesterol and fatty acid synthesis in hepatocytes
6. Required for the hepatic conversion of pyruvate to glucose
19
CHAPTER 13 | CITRIC ACID CYCLE AND OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION
Answers
1. Answer: B. Both PFK 1 and LDH participate in extrahepatic anaerobic
glycolysis, but only PFK 1 is regulated by allosteric effectors.
2. Answer: C. Nitroprusside is metabolized to produce nitric oxide. NO,
normally produced by the vascular endothelium, stimulates the cyclase in
vascular smooth muscle to increase cGMP, activate protein kinase G, and
cause relaxation.
3. Answer: D. In addition to NO, metabolism of nitroprusside also releases
small quantities of cyanide, a potent and potentially lethal inhibitor of cyt
a/a3 (complex IV). Thiosulfate is a common antidote for CN poisoning.
4. Answer: C. The toxic agent (example, 2,4 dinitrophenol) would uncouple
oxidative phosphorylation, leading to a fall in ATP levels, increased respira
tion, and increased substrate utilization.
5. Answer: A. Both fatty acids and cholesterol are synthesized from acetyl
CoA in the cytoplasm. Acetyl CoA, which is produced in the mitochondria,
is delivered to these pathways using the citrate shuttle.
6. Answer: C. Oxaloacetate, produced from pyruvate, exits the mitochondrion
after conversion to malate.
19

Glycogen, Gluconeogenesis, and the
14 #
Hexose Monophosphate Shunt
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Interpret scenarios about glycogenesis and glycogenolysis
❏ Know how glycogen synthesis is regulated
❏ Know how glycogenolysis is regulated
❏ Know the glycogen storage diseases
❏ Solve problems concerning gluconeogenesis
❏ Use knowledge of hexose monophosphate shunt
GLYCOGENESIS AND GLYCOGENOLYSIS
Glycogen, a branched polymer of glucose, represents a storage form of glucose.
Glycogen synthesis and degradation occur primarily in liver and skeletal muscle,
although other tissues such as cardiac muscle and the kidney store smaller
quantities.
Glycogen is stored in the cytoplasm as single granules (skeletal muscle) or as
clusters of granules (liver). The granule has a central protein core with polyglucose
chains radiating outward to form a sphere.
• Glycogen granules composed entirely of linear chains have the highest
density of glucose near the core. Figure I 14 1.
Figure I 14 1. Glycogen Granule
A glycogen granule
• If the chains are branched, glucose density is highest at the periphery of
the granule, allowing more rapid release of glucose on demand.
Glycogen stored in the liver is a source of glucose mobilized during hypoglycemia.
Muscle glycogen is stored as an energy reserve for muscle contraction. In white
(fast twitch) muscle fibers, the glucose is converted primarily to lactate, whereas in
red (slow twitch) muscle fibers, the glucose is completely oxidized.
GLYCOGEN SYNTHESIS
Synthesis of glycogen granules begins with a core protein glycogenin. Glucose
addition to a granule begins with glucose 6 phosphate, which is converted to
glucose 1 phosphate and activated to UDP glucose for addition to the glycogen
chain by glycogen synthase. Glycogen synthase is the rate limiting enzyme of
glycogen synthesis.
20
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Epinephrine
(liver and muscle)
Insulin
(liver Glycogen Glucagon AMP
muscle) (liver) muscle
MedicalGenetics
Pi + + +
+
UDP
Glycogen
Glycogen
phosphorylase
synthase
(and debranching
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences (and branching
enzyme)
enzyme)
UDP Glucose
PPi
UTP
Glucose 1 P
Glucose 6 P
Glycolysis (ATP)
Glucose
(muscle) CO2 + H2O
6 phosphatase
(liver)
HY
Glucose Pyruvate Lactate
MY
Figure I 14 2. Glycogen Metabolism LY
Figure I 14 2. Glycogen Metabolism
High Yield H
Glycogen Synthase
Glycogen synthase forms the α1,4 glycosidic bond found in theMEDlinIUeaMr gluYcoIsEeLD ME
chains of the granule. Note the differences in the control of glycogen synthase in
the liver and skeletal muscle. LOW YIELD
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
Table I 14 1. Comparison of Glycogen Synthase in Liver and Muscle
REINFORCEMENT RE
Glycogen Synthase Liver Skeletal Muscle
Activated by Insulin Insulin
Inhibited by Glucagon, Epinephrine
epinephrine
GLYCOGENOLYSIS
The rate limiting enzyme of glycogenolysis is glycogen phosphorylase (in contrast
to a hydrolase, a phosphorylase breaks bonds using Pi rather than H2O). The
glucose 1 phosphate formed is converted to glucose 6 phosphate by the same
mutase used in glycogen synthesis.
20
MY MY
CHAPTER 14 | GLYCOGEN, GLUCONEOGELNYESIS, AND THE HEXOSE MOLNYOPHOSPHATE SHUNT
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Glycogen Phosphorylase
Glycogen phosphorylase breaks α1,4 glycosidic bonds, releasing MgElDucIUosMe 1YIpEhLosDphate MEDIUM YIELD
from the periphery of the granule. Control of the enzyme in liver and muscle is
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
compared below.
Table I 14 2. Comparison of Glycogen Phosphorylase in Liver and Muscle
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
Glycogen Phosphorylase Liver Skeletal Muscle
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
Activated by Epinephrine Epinephrine
Glucagon AMP
Ca2+ (through calmodulin)
Inhibited by Insulin Insulin
ATP
Glycogen phosphorylase cannot break α1,6 bonds and thus stops when it nears the
outermost branch points.
GENETIC DEFICIENCIES OF ENzYMES IN
GLYCOGEN METABOLISM
Important genetic deficiencies are classed as glycogen storage diseases since all are
characterized by an accumulation of glycogen.
Table I 14 3. Glycogen Storage Diseases
Type Deficient Enzyme Cardinal Clinical Features Glycogen Structure
I: von Gierke Glucose 6 phosphatase Severe hypoglycemia, lactic acido Normal
sis, hepatomegaly, hyperlipidemia,
hyperuricemia, short stature,
doll like facies, protruding abdomen
emaciated extremities
II: Pompe Lysosomal Cardiomegaly, muscle weakness, Glycogen like material in
death by 2 years inclusion bodies
α1, 4 glucosidase
III: Cori Glycogen debranching Mild hypoglycemia, liver enlargement Short outer branches; single
enzyme glucose residue at outer
branch
IV: Andersen Branching enzyme Infantile hypotonia, cirrhosis, death Very few branches, especially
by 2 years toward periphery
V: McArdle Muscle glycogen Muscle cramps and weakness on Normal
phosphorylase exercise, myoglobinuria
VI: Hers Hepatic glycogen Mild fasting hypoglycemia, Normal
phosphorylase hepatomegaly, cirrhosis
20
Immunology
MY
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY LY
Biochemistry
High Yield H
NOTE Glucose 6 Phosphatase Deficiency
Glycogen storage diseases are the favorite (von Gierke Disease) MEDIUM YIELD ME
biochemistry topic of the exam. Be sure to Deficiency of hepatic glucose 6 phosphatase produces a profound fasting hypogly
LOW YIELD
MedicalGenetkicnsow: cemia, lactic acidosis, and hepatomegaly. Additional symptoms include:
• Clinical features • Glycogen deposits in the liver (glucose 6 P stimulates glycogen synthesis,
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
and glycogenolysis is inhibited)
• Deficient enzyme
REINFORCEMENT RE
• Hyperuricemia predisposing to gout. Decreased Pi causes increased AMP,
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
• Accumulating by products which is degraded to uric acid. Lactate slows uric acid excretion in the
kidney.
• Hyperlipidemia with skin xanthomas
• Fatty liver
In a person with glucose 6 phosphatase deficiency, ingestion of galactose or
fructose causes no increase in blood glucose, nor does administration of glucagon
or epinephrine.
Lysosomal α1,4 Glucosidase Deficiency (Pompe Disease)
Pompe disease is different from the other diseases described here because the
enzyme missing is not one in the normal process of glycogenolysis. The deficient
enzyme normally resides in the lysosome and is responsible for digesting glyco
gen like material accumulating in endosomes. In this respect, it is more similar to
diseases like Tay Sachs or even I cell disease in which indigestible substrates
accumulate in inclusion bodies.
In Pompe disease, the tissues most severely affected are those that normally have
glycogen stores. With infantile onset, massive cardiomegaly is usually the cause of
death, typically age <2.
POMPE DISEASE
A 12 month old girl had slowly progressing muscle weakness in her
arms and legs and difficulty breathing. Her liver was enlarged and CT
revealed cardiomegaly. Muscle biopsy showed muscle degeneration with
many enlarged, prominent lysosomes filled with clusters of electron dense
granules. Her parents were told that without treatment, the symptoms
would worsen and likely result in death in 1–2 years. Enzyme replacement
therapy was initiated.
This child has a defect of the enzyme lysosomal α1,4 glucosidase (also called
acid maltase). Coordinated glycogen breakdown with phosphorylase and
debranching enzyme occurs in the cytoplasm. Although the α1,4 glucosidase
participates in glycogen breakdown, the purpose of this enzyme and the
reason for its location in the lysosome are unknown. Nevertheless, tissues that
contain most of the body glycogen (liver and muscle) are severely affected in
Pompe disease.
20
CHAPTER 14 | GLYCOGEN, GLUCONEOGENESIS, AND THE HEXOSE MONOPHOSPHATE SHUNT
Recall Question
Which of the following activates the enzyme responsible for breaking
alpha 1,4 glycosidic bonds?
A. ADP
B. AMP
C. ATP HY HY
D. Insulin MY MY
LY LY
Answer: B
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Myophosphorylase Deficiency
(McArdle Disease) MEDIUM YIELD MEDIUM YIELD
LOW YIELD LOW YIEL
McARDLE DISEASE
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
A 25 year old woman had a lifelong history of exercise intolerance that
was often accompanied by episodes of cramping. The episodes REINFOwReCreEMENT REINFORCEMENT
somewhat ameliorated by drinking sucrose rich soft drinks immediately
before exercise. The latest episode occurred during her first spin class
(stationary bicycling with a resistance load) at her local bicycle shop. She
initially had extreme weakness in both legs and muscle cramps and later
excreted red brown urine. In subsequent sessions, in addition to the high
sucrose drink, she reduced the load on the bicycle and was better able to
tolerate the initial phase of exercise. After 10–15 minutes, she experienced
a “second wind” and was able to continue her exercise successfully.
Myophosphorylase is another name for the muscle glycogen phosphorylase.
Symptoms of myophosphorylase deficiency include exercise intolerance
during the initial phase of intense exercise, muscle cramping, possible
myoglobinuria, and recovery (or “second wind”) after 10–15 minutes of
exercise.
The woman in our vignette has myophosphorylase deficiency and is unable to
properly break down glycogen to glucose 6 phosphate in her muscles. Without an
adequate supply of glucose, sufficient energy via glycolysis for carrying out muscle
contraction cannot be obtained, explaining why the muscles are not functioning
well (weakness and cramps). The situation is improved by drinking the sucrose
containing drink, which provides dietary glucose for the muscles to use.
Hepatic Glycogen Phosphorylase Deficiency (Hers Disease)
Hepatic glycogen phosphorylase deficiency is usually a mild disease because
gluconeogenesis compensates for the lack of glycogenolysis. If present, hypoglyce
mia, hyperlipidemia, and hyperketosis are mild. Hepatomegaly and growth
retardation may be present in early childhood, although hepatomegaly may
improve with age.
205
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
GLUCONEOGENESIS
During fasting, the liver maintains glucose levels in blood through glycogenolysis
or gluconeogenesis. These pathways are promoted by glucagon and epinephrine
and inhibited by insulin. In fasting, glycogen reserves drop dramatically in the first
MedicalGenetics
12 hours, during which time gluconeogenesis increases. After 24 hours, it repre
sents the sole source of glucose.
Important substrates for gluconeogenesis are:
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
• Glycerol 3 phosphate (from triacylglycerol in adipose)
• Lactate (from anaerobic glycolysis)
• Gluconeogenic amino acids (protein from muscle)
Table I 14 4. Glucogenic and Ketogenic Amino Acids
Ketogenic Ketogenic and Glucogenic Glucogenic
Leucine Phenylalanine All others
Lysine Tyrosine
Tryptophan
Isoleucine
Threonine
Dietary fructose and galactose can also be converted to glucose in the liver.
In humans, it is not possible to convert acetyl CoA to glucose. Inasmuch as most
fatty acids are metabolized solely to acetyl CoA, they are not a major source of
glucose either. One minor exception is odd number carbon fatty acids (e.g., C17),
which yield a small amount of propionyl CoA that is gluconeogenic.
20
CHAPTER 14 | GLYCOGEN, GLUCONEOGENESIS, AND THE HEXOSE MONOPHOSPHATE SHUNT
Glucose
Pi
Glucose 6 phosphatase Glucokinase
Glucose 6 P
Fructose 6 P
Pi
PFK 1
Fructose 1,6 bisphosphatase
Fructose 1,6 bis P
Most steps in this figure
NADH NAD
represent a reversal of
Glyceraldehyde 3 P DHAP Glycerol 3 P
glycolysis, and several of
these have been omitted
3 reversible
here.
reactions
PEP
PEP carboxykinase
Alanine
Pyruvate kinase
GDP
CO2
GTP
NADH NAD
OAA Pyruvate Lactate
Cytoplasm
Malate shuttle Mitochondria
Pyruvate
ATP
PDH
ADP CO2 –
OAA Pyruvate carboxylase Acetyl CoA
(biotin) + (from ß oxidation
of fatty acids)
Figure I 14 5. Gluconeogenesis
Figure I 14 3. Gluconeogenesis
20
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
In the pathway of gluconeogenesis, lactate is oxidized to pyruvate by lactate
dehydrogenase. The important gluconeogenic amino acid alanine is converted to
pyruvate by alanine aminotransferase (ALT or GPT). Glycerol 3 phosphate is
oxidized to dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) by glycerol 3 phosphate
MedicalGenetics dehydrogenase.
The 4 important enzymes are those required to catalyze reactions that circumvent
the irreversible steps:
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences • Pyruvate carboxylase is a mitochondrial enzyme requiring biotin. It is
activated by acetyl CoA (from β oxidation). The product oxaloacetate
(OAA), a citric acid cycle intermediate, cannot leave the mitochondria but
is reduced to malate that can leave via the malate shuttle. In the cyto
plasm, malate is reoxidized to OAA.
• Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) in the cytoplasm is
induced by glucagon and cortisol. It converts OAA to phosphoenolpyru
vate (PEP) in a reaction that requires GTP. PEP continues in the pathway
to fructose 1,6 bisphosphate.
• Fructose 1,6 bisphosphatase in the cytoplasm is a key control point of
gluconeogenesis. It hydrolyzes phosphate from fructose 1,6 bisphosphate
rather than using it to generate ATP from ADP. A common pattern to note
is that phosphatases oppose kinases. Fructose 1,6 bisphosphatase is
activated by ATP and inhibited by AMP and fructose 2,6 bisphosphate.
Fructose 2,6 bisphosphate, produced by PFK 2, controls both gluconeo
genesis and glycolysis (in the liver). Recall that PFK 2 is activated by
insulin and inhibited by glucagon. Thus, glucagon will lower F 2,6 BP and
stimulate gluconeogenesis, whereas insulin will increase F 2,6 BP and
inhibit gluconeogenesis.
• Glucose 6 phosphatase is in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum.
Glucose 6 phosphate is transported into the ER, and free glucose is
transported back into the cytoplasm from which it leaves the cell. Glucose
6 phosphatase is only in the liver. The absence of glucose 6 phosphatase
in skeletal muscle accounts for the fact that muscle glycogen cannot serve
as a source of blood glucose (see Chapter 17).
NOTE Although alanine is the major gluconeogenic amino acid, 18 of the 20 (all but
leucine and lysine) are also gluconeogenic. Most of these are converted by indi
Biotin deficiency is caused by raw egg
vidual pathways to citric acid cycle intermediates, then to malate, following the
whites (avidin) or long term home TPN.
same path from there to glucose.
Symptoms include:
It is important to note that glucose produced by hepatic gluconeogenesis does not
• Alopecia represent an energy source for the liver. Gluconeogenesis requires expenditure of
ATP that is provided by β oxidation of fatty acids.
• Scaly dermatitis
Therefore, hepatic gluconeogenesis is always dependent on β oxidation of fatty
• Waxy pallor
acids in the liver. During hypoglycemia, adipose tissue releases these fatty acids by
• Acidosis (mild) breaking down triglyceride.
Although the acetyl CoA from fatty acids cannot be converted to glucose, it can be
converted to ketone bodies as an alternative fuel for cells, including the brain.
Chronic hypoglycemia is thus often accompanied physiologically by an increase in
ketone bodies.
20
CHAPTER 14 | GLYCOGEN, GLUCONEOGENESIS, AND THE HEXOSE MONOPHOSPHATE SHUNT
Coordinate Regulation of Pyruvate Carboxylase and Pyruvate
Dehydrogenase by Acetyl CoA
The 2 major mitochondrial enzymes which use pyruvate, pyruvate carboxylase and
pyruvate dehydrogenase are both regulated by acetyl CoA. This control is impor
tant in these contexts:
• Between meals, when fatty acids are oxidized in the liver for energy,
accumulating acetyl CoA activates pyruvate carboxylase and gluconeogen
esis and inhibits PDH, thus preventing conversion of lactate and alanine to
acetyl CoA.
• In the well fed, absorptive state (insulin), accumulating acetyl CoA is
shuttled into the cytoplasm for fatty acid synthesis. OAA is necessary for
this transport, and acetyl CoA can stimulate its formation from pyruvate
(see Chapter 15, Figure I 15 1).
Cori Cycle and Alanine Cycle
During fasting, lactate from red blood cells (and possibly exercising skeletal
HY HY
muscle) is converted in the liver to glucose that can be returned to the red blood
cell or muscle. This is called the Cori cycle. The alanine cycle is a slightly diffeMreYnt MY
version of the Cori cycle, in which muscle releases alanine, delivering both a
gluconeogenic substrate (pyruvate) and an amino group for urea synthesis. LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Alcoholism and Hypoglycemia
Patients who abuse alcohol are very susceptible to hypoglycemia. MEDIUIMn additionYIELD to MEDIUM YIELD
poor nutrition and the fact that alcohol is metabolized to acetate (acetyl CoA), the
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
high amounts of cytoplasmic NADH formed by alcohol dehydrogenase and
acetaldehyde dehydrogenase interfere with gluconeogenesis. High NADH favors
the formation of:
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
• Lactate from pyruvate
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
• Malate from OAA in the cytoplasm
• Glycerol 3 phosphate from DHAP
The effect is to divert important gluconeogenic substrates from entering the
pathway.
20
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Alcohol
NAD
MedicalGenetics Alcohol dehydrogenase
NADH
Acetaldehyde
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
NAD
Acetaldehyde dehydrogenase
NADH
Acetate
Figure I 14 6. Alcohol Metabolism
Figure I 14 4. Alcohol Metabolism
Accumulation of cytoplasmic NADH and glycerol 3 P may also contribute to
lipid accumulation in alcoholic liver disease. Free fatty acids released from
adipose in part enter the liver where β oxidation is very slow (high NADH). In
the presence of high glycerol 3 P, fatty acids are inappropriately stored in the liver
as triglyceride.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
EXTREME EXERCISE AND ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION
Alcohol abuse may lead to hepatic steatosis,
which is fatty degeneration of liver tissue. Immediately after completing a 26 mile marathon race, a healthy 24 year
old man was extremely dehydrated and thirsty. He quickly consumed
a 6 pack of ice cold beer and shortly thereafter became very weak and
light headed and nearly fainted. He complained of muscle cramping and
pain.
Although the effect of alcohol is unrelated to the hormonal control of
gluconeogenesis, excessive consumption of alcohol can cause severe
hypoglycemia after running a marathon. In exercising muscle, lactic acid
builds up in muscle due to anaerobic glycolysis, causing muscle cramping and
pain. The lactate spills into blood and is converted to glucose in the liver, as
part of the Cori cycle. But to carry out gluconeogenesis, NAD is required by
lactate dehydrogenase to oxidize lactate to pyruvate. However, much of the
available NAD is being used for ethanol metabolism and is unavailable for
lactate oxidation. The result is metabolic acidosis and hypoglycemia.
21
CHAPTER 14 | GLYCOGEN, GLUCONEOGENESIS, AND THE HEXOSE MONOPHOSPHATE SHUNT
HEXOSE MONOPHOSPHATE SHUNT
The hexose monophosphate (HMP) shunt (pentose phosphate pathway) occurs in
the cytoplasm of all cells, where it serves 2 major functions:
• NADPH production
• Source of ribose 5 phosphate for nucleotide synthesis
The first part of the HMP shunt begins with glucose 6 phosphate and ends with
ribulose 5 phosphate and is irreversible. This part produces NADPH and involves
the important rate limiting enzyme glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PDH).
G6PDH is induced by insulin, inhibited by NADPH, and activated by NADP.
Abbreviated diagram of the pathway Glucose
NADP NADPH NADP NADPH
Glucose 6 P 6 Phosphogluconate Ribulose 5 P
Glucose
6 P dehydrogenase
CO2
Fructose 6 P
Erythrose 4 P
Ribose 5 P
Xylulose 5 P
Sedoheptulose 7 P
Glyceraldehyde 3 P
Transketolase (TPP)
Nucleotide
Pyruvate
synthesis
Figure I 14 5F.iguHreexose IMo1n4ophos7p.hateThe HexSohsuent Monophosphate Shunt
The second part of the pathway, beginning with ribulose 5 phosphate, represents a
series of reversible reactions that produce an equilibrated pool of sugars for
biosynthesis, including ribose 5 phosphate for nucleotide synthesis. Because
fructose 6 phosphate and glyceraldehyde 3 phosphate are among the sugars
HY HY
produced, intermediates can feed back into glycolysis; conversely, pentoses can be
made from glycolytic intermediates without going through the G6PDH reactioMnY. MY
Transketolase, a thiamine requiring enzyme, is important for these
interconversions; it is the only thiamine enzyme in red blood cells. LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Functions of NADPH
Cells require NADPH for a variety of functions, including: MEDIUM YIELD MEDIUM YIELD
• Biosynthesis LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
• Maintenance of a supply of reduced glutathione to protect against reactive
oxygen species (ROS)
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
• Bactericidal activity in polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN)
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
These important roles are cell specific.
21
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Liver Neutrophil
Glucose Glucose
6 Phosphate 6 Phosphate
MedicalGenetics
s H h M un P t G6PDH NADPH s H hu M n P t G6PDH NADPH NADP +
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Biosynthesis NADPH oxidase
• fatty acids
–
• cholesterol O2 O2 H2O2
• nucleotides
Pentose Pentose
phosphates phosphates Kill bacteria
Erythrocyte
Glucose
6 Phosphate
HMP +
G6PDH NADPH NADP
shunt Glutathione
reductase
Oxidant stress
• infection
• drugs
Oxidized Reduced
• fava beans
glutathione glutathione
Pentose
phosphates
H2O2 O2
Glutathione Spontaneous
peroxidase
(Se) If accumulates
H2O
• Hemoglobin denaturation
(Heinz bodies)
• Membrane damage
(hemolytic anemia)
Figure I 14 8.FiguRroele I 1o4f 6t.heRoleHMoPf HMPShuSnthunt iinnHeHpeaptoactoycteyst,es, PhagocytesP,hagocyteasn,d Erythrocytesand Erythrocytes
21
MY MY
CHAPTER 14 | GLYCOGEN, GLUCONEOGELNYESIS, AND THE HEXOSE MOLNYOPHOSPHATE SHUNT
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Glucose 6 Phosphate Dehydrogenase CLINICAL CORRELATE
Deficiency MEDIUM YIELD Broad MEbDeaIUnsM (or YfaIEvaLD beans) are common to
Deficiency of G6PDH may result in hemolytic anemia and, in rare cases, symp diets in Mediterranean countries (Greece,
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
toms resembling chronic granulomatous disease (CGD). The disease shows Italy, Spain, Portugal, Turkey). Their ingestion
significant allelic heterogeneity (>400 different mutations in the G6PDH gene are may cause severe hemolysis in G6PDH
known). The disease is X linked recessive. FUNDAMENTALS individualFsUNDAM(EfaNvTisAmL).S Symptoms include
• Major symptom is an acute episodic or chronic hemolysis REIN(rFarOeR)CEMENT pallor, h R e E m IN og F l O ob R in C u E r M ia, ENT jaundice, and severe
anemia 24–48 hours after ingestion of the
• Female heterozygous for G6PDH deficiency have increased resistance to
beans.
malaria; consequently, the deficiency is often seen in families where
malaria is endemic
Because red blood cells contain a large amount of oxygen, they are prone to CLINICAL CORRELATE
spontaneously generate ROS that damage protein and lipid in the cell. In the
CGD is typically caused by genetic deficiency
presence of ROS, hemoglobin may precipitate (Heinz bodies) and membrane
lipids may undergo peroxidation, weakening the membrane and causing hemoly of NADPH oxidase in the PMN. Patients are
sis. As peroxides form, they are rapidly destroyed by the glutathione peroxidase/ susceptible to infection by catalase positive
glutathione reductase system in the red blood cell, thus avoiding these complica organisms such as S. aureus, Klebsiella, E.
tions. NADPH required by glutathione reductase is supplied by the HMP shunt in
coli, Candida, and Aspergillus. A negative
the erythrocyte.
nitroblue tetrazolium test helps to confirm
Persons with mutations that partially destroy G6PDH activity may develop an the diagnosis.
acute, episodic hemolysis. Certain mutations affect the stability of G6PDH, and,
because erythrocytes cannot synthesize proteins, the enzyme is gradually lost over
time and older red blood cells lyse. This process is accelerated by certain drugs BRIDGE TO MICROBIOLOGY
and, in a subset of patients, ingestion of fava beans. In the United States, the most
Many parasites such as Plasmodium are
likely cause of a hemolytic episode in these patients is overwhelming infection,
deficient in antioxidant mechanisms, making
often pneumonia (viral and bacterial) or infectious hepatitis.
them particularly susceptible to oxygen
In rare instances, a mutation may decrease the activity of G6PDH sufficiently to radicals. In G6PDH deficiency, the ability of
cause chronic nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia. Symptoms of CGD may also
erythrocytes to detoxify oxygen radicals is
develop if there is insufficient activity of G6PDH (<5% of normal) in the PMN to
impaired. Ironically, the accumulation of the
generate NADPH for the NADPH oxidase bactericidal system.
radicals in erythrocytes in G6PDH deficiency
gives protection against malaria.
21
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Review Questions
Select the ONE best answer.
1. A liver biopsy is done on a child with hepatomegaly and mild fasting
MedicalGenetics
hypoglycemia. Hepatocytes show accumulation of glycogen granules with
single glucose residues remaining at the branch points near the periphery of
the granule. The most likely genetic defect is in the gene encoding a(n)
A. α 1,4 phosphorylase
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
B. α 1,4:α 1,4 transferase
C. phosphoglucomutase
D. α 1,6 glucosidase
E. lysosomal α 1,4 glucosidase
2. When fatty acid β oxidation predominates in the liver, mitochondrial pyru
vate is most likely to be
A. carboxylated to phosphoenolpyruvate for entry into gluconeogenesis
B. oxidatively decarboxylated to acetyl CoA for entry into ketogenesis
C. reduced to lactate for entry into gluconeogenesis
D. oxidatively decarboxylated to acetyl CoA for oxidation in Krebs cycle
E. carboxylated to oxaloacetate for entry into gluconeogenesis
Items 3 and 4
A 44 year old man from South Africa, living in the United States and receiving
antibiotics for a urinary tract infection, has a self limiting episode of hemolysis,
back pain, and jaundice. Peripheral blood smear reveals a nonspherocytic, nor
mocytic anemia, and Heinz bodies are seen in some erythrocytes.
3. Which of the following genetic deficiencies is most likely related to his
hemolytic episode?
A. Homocysteine methyltransferase
B. Pyruvate kinase
C. Dihydrofolate reductase
D. Ferrochelatase
E. Glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase
4. Which of the following lab results would most likely be seen?
Direct Bilirubin Indirect Bilirubin Urinary Bilirubin
A. Increased Increased Absent
B. Increased Increased Present
C. Normal Increased Absent
D. Normal Decreased Present
E. Increased Decreased Present
21
CHAPTER 14 | GLYCOGEN, GLUCONEOGENESIS, AND THE HEXOSE MONOPHOSPHATE SHUNT
Answers
1. Answer: D. This activity of the debranching enzyme removes 1,6 linked
glucose residues from the branch points during glycogenolysis.
2. Answer: E. Hepatic fatty acid oxidation generates energy in the postabsorp
tive period when pyruvate is being converted to OAA for glucose biosyn
thesis.
3. Answer: E. Only option E is consistent with the constellation of clinical
findings presented. Major clue is the positive Heinz body preparation.
4. Answer: C. Only choice C is characteristic of hemolytic jaundice; indirect
hyperbilirubinemia with no spillover of the water insoluble unconjugated
form into the urine.
21

15
Lipid Synthesis and Storage
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Answer questions about fatty acid nomenclature
❏ Understand lipid digestion
❏ Answer questions about fatty acid biosynthesis
❏ Demonstrate understanding of lipoprotein metabolism
❏ Explain information related to hyperlipidemias
❏ Use knowledge of cholesterol metabolism
FATTY ACID NOMENCLATURE
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Fatty acids are long chain carboxylic acids. The carboxyl carbon is number 1,
and carbon number 2 is referred to as the α carbon. When designating a fatty Omega 3 fatty acids in the diet are
acid, the number of carbons is given along with the number of double bonds correlated with a decreased risk of
(carbons:double bonds).
cardiovascular disease. These appear to
replace some of the arachidonic acid (an
Palmitic acid (palmitate) is the primary end product of fatty acid synthesis.
omega 6 fatty acid) in platelet membranes
CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2COO and may lower the production of
thromboxane and the tendency of the
Palmitate C16:0 or 16:0
platelets to aggregate.
Saturated fatty acids have no double bonds. High omega 3 fatty acids have also been
associated with a decrease in serum
Unsaturated fatty acids have ≥1 double bonds. Humans can synthesize only a few
of the unsaturated fatty acids; the rest come from essential fatty acids in the diet triglycerides; they are high in some cold
that are transported as triglycerides from the intestine in chylomicrons. water fish (salmon, tuna, herring), nuts
(walnuts), and seeds (flaxseed).
Linolenic acid and linoleic acid are 2 important essential fatty acids. These
polyunsaturated fatty acids—as well as other acids formed from them—are
important in membrane phospholipids to maintain normal fluidity of cell mem
branes essential for many functions.
The omega (ω) numbering system is used for unsaturated fatty acids. The ω family
describes the position of the last double bond relative to the end of the chain. The
omega designation identifies the major precursor fatty acid, e.g., arachidonic acid
is formed from linoleic acid (ω 6 family). Arachidonic acid is itself an important
precursor for prostaglandins, thromboxanes, and leukotrienes.
Linoleic C18:2 (9,12) or 18Δ9,12 ω 6 family (18 - 12 = 6)
Linolenic C18:3 (9,12,15) or 18Δ9,12,15 ω 3 family
Arachidonic C20:4 (5,8,11,14) or 20Δ5,8,11,14 ω 6 family
217
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Double bonds in fatty acids are in the cis configuration. Trans double bonds are
unnatural and predominate in fatty acids found in margarine and other foods
where partial hydrogenation of vegetable oils is used in their preparation.
Compared with liquid oils, these partial hydrogenated fatty acids are conveniently
MedicalGenetics solid at cool temperatures. When incorporated into phospholipids that constitute
membranes, trans fatty acids decrease membrane fluidity, similar to saturated
fatty acids that are found in butter fat and other foods. Trans fatty acids, as well as
saturated fatty acids, are associated with increased risk of atherosclerosis.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Activation of Fatty Acids
When fatty acids are used in metabolism, they are first activated by attaching
coenzyme A (CoA); fatty acyl CoA synthetase catalyzes this activation step. The
product is generically referred to as a fatty acyl CoA or sometimes just acyl CoA.
Specific examples would be acetyl CoA with a 2 carbon acyl group, or palmitoyl
CoA with a 16 carbon acyl group.
Fatty acid + CoA + ATP → Fatty acyl CoA + AMP + PPi
LIPID DIGESTION
Typical high fat meals contain gram level amounts of triglycerides and milligram
level amounts of cholesterol and cholesterol esters.
• Upon entry into the intestinal lumen, bile is secreted by the liver to
emulsify the lipid contents.
• The pancreas secretes pancreatic lipase, colipase, and cholesterol esterase
which degrade the lipids to 2 monoglyceride, fatty acids, and cholesterol.
These lipids are absorbed and re esterified to triglycerides and cholesterol
esters and packaged, along with apoprotein B 48 and other lipids (e.g.,
fat soluble vitamins), into chylomicrons.
• Normally, there is very little lipid loss in stools. Defects in lipid digestion
result in steatorrhea, in which there is an excessive amount of lipids in
stool (fatty stools).
FATTY ACID BIOSYNTHESIS
Excess dietary glucose can be converted to fatty acids in the liver and subsequently
sent to the adipose tissue for storage. Adipose tissue synthesizes smaller quantities
of fatty acids. The pathway is shown in Figure I 15 1. Insulin promotes many steps
in the conversion of glucose to acetyl CoA in the liver:
• Glucokinase (induced)
• PFK 2/PFK 1 (PFK 2 dephosphorylated)
• Pyruvate dehydrogenase (dephosphorylated)
Both of the major enzymes of fatty acid synthesis are also affected by insulin:
• Acetyl CoA carboxylase (dephosphorylated, activated)
• Fatty acid synthase (induced)
21
CHAPTER 15 | LIPID SYNTHESIS AND STORAGE
Citrate Shuttle and Malic Enzyme
The citrate shuttle transports acetyl CoA groups from the mitochondria to the
cytoplasm for fatty acid synthesis. Acetyl CoA combines with oxaloacetate in the
mitochondria to form citrate, but rather than continuing in the citric acid cycle,
citrate is transported into the cytoplasm. Factors that indirectly promote this
process include insulin and high energy status.
In the cytoplasm, citrate lyase splits citrate back into acetyl CoA and oxaloacetate.
The oxaloacetate returns to the mitochondria to transport additional acetyl CoA.
This process is shown below and includes the important malic enzyme. This
reaction represents an additional source of cytoplasmic NADPH in liver and
adipose tissue, supplementing that from the HMP shunt.
Mitochondria Cytoplasm Insulin
Citrate
+ Induces
shuttle
Acetyl CoA CO2
Acetyl CoA Citrate Citrate + carboxylase Fatty acid
(biotin) synthase Fatty acid
Acetyl CoA Malonyl palmitate
CoA NADPH (16:0
OAA OAA
CO2
Malate
Pyruvate
NADP+
PDH carboxylase
(biotin) Malic
enzyme
NADPH
HMP shunt
Pyruvate Pyruvate Glucose
and Glycolysis
HY HY
MY MY
Figure I 15 1. FSiygnutrheesis Io1f5Pal1m.itateSynthesisfrom GlucoofsePalmitate from GlucLoYse LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Acetyl CoA Carboxylase
Acetyl CoA is activated in the cytoplasm for incorporation into MEDfaIttUyM acidsYIELbDy MEDIUM YIELD
acetyl CoA carboxylase, the rate limiting enzyme of fatty acid biosynthesis. Acetyl
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
CoA carboxylase requires biotin, ATP, and CO2. Controls include:
• Activation by insulin (dephosphorylated)
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
• Activation by citrate
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
The CO2 added to form malonyl CoA is never incorporated into the fatty acid
because it is removed by fatty acid synthase during the addition of the acetyl group
to the fatty acid.
Fatty Acid Synthase
Fatty acid synthase is more appropriately called palmitate synthase because
palmitate is the only fatty acid that humans can synthesize de novo. This enzyme is
a large, multienzyme complex in the cytoplasm that is rapidly induced in the liver
219
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
after a meal by high carbohydrate and concomitantly rising insulin levels. It
contains an acyl carrier protein (ACP) that requires the vitamin pantothenic acid.
Although malonyl CoA is the substrate used by fatty acid synthase, only the
carbons from the acetyl CoA portion are actually incorporated into the fatty acid
MedicalGenetics produced. Therefore, the fatty acid is derived entirely from acetyl CoA.
NADPH is required to reduce the acetyl groups added to the fatty acid. Eight
acetyl CoA groups are required to produce palmitate (16:0).
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Fatty acyl CoA may be elongated and desaturated (to a limited extent in humans)
using enzymes associated with the smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER). Cyto
chrome b5 is involved in the desaturation reactions. These enzymes cannot
introduce double bonds past position 9 in the fatty acid.
TRIGLYCERIDE (TRIACYLGLYCEROL) SYNTHESIS
Triglycerides
Triglycerides, the storage form of fatty acids, are formed by attaching 3 fatty acids
(as fatty acyl CoA) to glycerol. Triglyceride formation from fatty acids and glycerol
3 phosphate occurs primarily in liver and adipose tissue.
The liver sends triglycerides to adipose tissue packaged as very low density
lipoproteins. A small amount of triglyceride may be stored in the liver. Accumula
tion of significant triglyceride in tissues other than adipose tissue usually indicates
a pathologic state.
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY
There are 2 sources of glycerol 3 P for triglyceride synthesis:
Chronic alcohol use can interfere with lipid
metabolism in the liver, leading to steatosis, • Reduction of dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) from glycolysis by
or fatty degeneration of the liver glycerol 3 P dehydrogenase, an enzyme in both adipose tissue and liver
parenchyma. • Phosphorylation of free glycerol by glycerol kinase, an enzyme found in
liver but not in adipose tissue
Glycerol kinase allows the liver to recycle the glycerol released during VLDL
metabolism (insulin) back into new triglyceride synthesis. During fasting
(glucagon), this same enzyme allows the liver to trap glycerol released into the
blood from lipolysis in adipose tissue for subsequent conversion to glucose.
Adipose tissue lacks glycerol kinase and is strictly dependent on glucose uptake to
produce DHAP for triglyceride synthesis. In adipose tissue, the GLUT 4 transport
er is stimulated by insulin, ensuring a good supply of DHAP for triglyceride
synthesis.
22
CHAPTER 15 | LIPID SYNTHESIS AND STORAGE
ADIPOSE LIVER
DHAP Glucose Glucose Glucose DHAP
Glycerol 3 P
Glycerol 3 P dehydrogenase
dehydrogenase Glycerol kinase
Glycerol Glycerol 3 P
Glycerol 3 P
3 FA CoA
3 FA CoA VLDL VLDL Triglyceride
Triglyceride
(storage)
HY HY
MY MY
Figure FigIure15 I2.15 G2ly.ceGrollycerol 33 PPDeDheyhdyrodgroegneansease and and
Glycerol GlycKerionlase Kinasein TinrigTlyricgelryidceeride SynSthyenstihsesis and Stoarnadge Storage LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Glycerophospholipids
Glycerophospholipids are used for membrane synthesis and forMEDpIrUodMucing YIELDa MEDIUM YIELD
hydrophilic surface layer on lipoproteins such as VLDL. In cell membranes, they
also serve as a reservoir of second messengers such as diacylglycerol, LOinWositolYIELD LOW YIELD
1,4,5 triphosphate, and arachidonic acid.
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
The structure of glycerophospholipids is similar to that of triglycerides, except that
the last fatty acid is replaced by phosphate and a water soluble group such as
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
choline (phosphatidylcholine, lecithin) or inositol (phosphatidylinositol).
Triglyceride Glycerophospholipid
Acid Acid Acid Acid
Aci
Fatty Fatty Fatty Fatty Fatty
Glycerol Glycerol 3P
Inositol
Figure I 15 3. Triglycerides and
Figure I 15 3. Triglycerides and
Glycerophospholipids
Glycerophospholipids
221
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
LIPOPROTEIN METABOLISM
Cholesterol Digestion
MedicalGenetics Triglycerides and cholesterol are transported in the blood as lipoproteins.
Lipoproteins are named according to their density, which increases with the
percentage of protein in the particle.
From least dense to most dense:
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Chylomicrons < VLDL < IDL (intermediate density lipoproteins)
< LDL (low density lipoproteins) < HDL (high density lipoproteins)
VLDL secreted from the liver
Phospholipid
Cholesterol
Triacylglycerol
Apoprotein B 100
Figure Figure I 15I 154.4. LLiippoopprrootteeiinn StructuSrteructure
22
MY MY
LY CHAPTER 15 | LIPID SYNLTYHESIS AND STORAGE
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Lipoprotein and Apoprotein Classes
MEDIUM YIELD MEDIUM YIELD
Table I 15 1. Classes of Lipoproteins and Important Apoproteins
Lipoprotein Functions LAOpoWproteinYsIELD Functions LOW YIELD
Chylomicrons Transport dietary triglyceride and apoB 48 Secreted by intestine
cholesterol from intestine to FUNDAMEaNpoTCALS II Activates FUNDAMlipEoNpTroAteLiSn lipase
tissues apoE Uptake of remnants by the liver
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
VLDL Transports triglyceride from apoB 100 Secreted by liver
liver to tissues apoC II Activates lipoprotein lipase
apoE Uptake of remnants (IDL) by liver
IDL Picks up cholesterol from HDL apoE Uptake by liver
(VLDL remnants) to become LDL apoB 100
Picked up by liver
LDL Delivers cholesterol into cells apoB 100 Uptake by liver and other tissues
via LDL receptor (apoB 100
receptor)
HDL Picks up cholesterol accumulating apoA 1 Activates lecithin cholesterol
in blood vessels acyltransferase (LCAT) to produce
cholesterol esters
Delivers cholesterol to liver and
steroidogenic tissues via scavenger HY HY
receptor (SR B1)
MY MY
Shuttles apoC II and apoE in blood
LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Chylomicrons, VLDL, and IDL
Chylomicrons and VLDL are primarily triglyceride particles, aMlthEoDugIUhM thYeyIELDeach MEDIUM YIELD
have small quantities of cholesterol esters.
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
• Chylomicrons transport dietary triglyceride to adipose tissue and muscle
• VLDL transport triglyceride synthesized in the liver to these same tissues
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
Both chylomicrons and VLDL have apoC II, apoE, and apoB (apoB 48 on
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
chylomicrons and apoB 100 on VLDL).
Lipoprotein lipase (LPLase) is required for the metabolism of both chylomicrons
and VLDL. This enzyme is induced by insulin and transported to the luminal
surface of capillary endothelium, where it is in direct contact with the blood.
Lipoprotein lipase hydrolyzes the fatty acids from triglycerides carried by
chylomicrons and VLDL and is activated by apoC II.
22
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
apoB 48 apoB 48
TGL TGL ADIPOS
MedicalGenetics CE CE
apoC II
Chylomicron
apoE
INTESTINE (lymph)
(Epithelium) Chylomicron
+ Lipoprotein
(blood)
lipase
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
apoE apoB 48
Fatty acids
TGL
Cholesterol
CE Glycerol 3 P
Chylomicron
remnant
LIVER apoB 100 Triglycerides
apoB 100
TGL TGL
Triglyceride
chol chol
apoC II
Glucose VLDL apoE
Glycerol 3 P
(blood)
VLDL Lipoprotein
(blood) + lipase
apoE apoB 100
Fatty acids
TGL
chol
IDL
Figure I 15 5. Chylomicron and VLDL Metabolism
Figure I 15 6. Chylomicron and VLDL Metabolism
Chylomicrons
Chylomicrons are assembled from dietary triglycerides (containing predominantly
the longer chain fatty acids, including the essential fatty acids), cholesterol esters,
and the 4 lipid soluble vitamins. The core lipid is surrounded by phospholipids
similar to those found in cell membranes, which increase the solubility of chylomi
crons in lymph and blood. ApoB 48 is attached and required for release from the
epithelial cells into the lymphatics.
Chylomicrons leave the lymph and enter the peripheral blood, where the thoracic
duct joins the left subclavian vein, thus initially bypassing the liver. After a high fat
meal, chylomicrons cause serum to become turbid or milky. While in the blood,
chylomicrons acquire apoC II and apoE from HDL particles.
In capillaries of adipose tissue (and muscle), apoC II activates lipoprotein lipase,
the fatty acids released enter the tissue for storage, and the glycerol is retrieved by
the liver, which has glycerol kinase. The chylomicron remnant is picked up by
hepatocytes through the apoE receptor; thus, dietary cholesterol, as well as any
remaining triglyceride, is released in the hepatocyte.
VLDL
The metabolism of VLDL is very similar to that of chylomicrons, the major
difference being that VLDL are assembled in hepatocytes to transport triglyceride
containing fatty acids newly synthesized from excess glucose, or retrieved from the
chylomicron remnants, to adipose tissue and muscle. ApoB 100 is added in the
224
CHAPTER 15 | LIPID SYNTHESIS AND STORAGE
hepatocytes to mediate release into the blood. Like chylomicrons, VLDL acquire
apoC II and apoE from HDL in the blood and are metabolized by lipoprotein
lipase in adipose tissue and muscle.
VLDL remnants (IDL)
After triglyceride is removed from the VLDL, the resulting particle is called a
VLDL remnant or an IDL. A portion of the IDLs is picked up by hepatocytes
HY HY
through their apoE receptor, but some of the IDLs remain in the blood, where they
are further metabolized. These IDLs are transition particles between triglycerideMY MY
and cholesterol transport. In the blood, they can acquire cholesterol esters trans
ferred from HDL particles and thus become converted into LDLs. LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
LDL and HDL
Although both LDL and HDL are primarily cholesterol particles, MEDIUmMost ofYIEthLeD MEDIUM YIELD
cholesterol measured in the blood is associated with LDL. The normal role of LDL
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
is to deliver cholesterol to tissues for biosynthesis. When a cell is repairing
membrane or dividing, the cholesterol is required for membrane synthesis. Bile
acids and salts are made from cholesterol in the liver, and many other tissues
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
require some cholesterol for steroid synthesis. About 80% of LDL are picked up by
hepatocytes, the remainder by peripheral tissues. REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
ApoB 100 is the only apoprotein on LDL, and endocytosis of LDL is mediated by
apoB 100 receptors (LDL receptors) clustered in areas of cell membranes lined
with the protein clathrin.
The liver has multiple pathways for acquiring cholesterol, including:
• De novo synthesis
• Endocytosis of LDL
• Transfer of cholesterol from HDL via the SR B1 receptor
• Endocytosis of chylomicron remnants with residual dietary cholesterol
Increased cholesterol in the hepatocytes inhibits further accumulation by repress
ing the expression of the genes for HMG CoA reductase, the LDL receptor, and
the SR B1 receptor.
22
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
LDL binds to LDL (apoB 100)
receptors
MedicalGenetics Hepatocyte
Endocytosis (clathrin coated pits)
Lysosomal fusion
Release of free cholesterol
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Receptor recycling
De novo
synthesis
Cholesterol Acetyl CoA
–
LDL receptor – HMG CoA
gene expression + reductase
ACAT
Cholesterol
ACAT: Acyl cholesterol esters
acyl transferase (storage)
Bile acids
Figure FiIgur1e5 7I.15Reg6u.latiRoengulation ooff CChoholelsetsetreorlol Level LienvelHepatocyitnes Hepatocytes
Endocytosis involves:
• Formation of a coated pit, which further invaginates to become an
endosome
• Fusion of the endosome with a lysosome, accompanied by acidification
and activation of lysosomal enzymes
• Release of LDL from the LDL receptor
The receptor may recycle to the surface, the LDL is degraded, and cholesterol is
released into the cell. Expression of the gene for LDL receptors (apoB 100 recep
tor) is regulated by the cholesterol level within the cell. High cholesterol decreases
expression of this gene as well as the gene for HMG CoA reductase, the rate
limiting enzyme of de novo cholesterol synthesis.
HDL
HDL is synthesized in the liver and intestines and released as dense, protein rich
particles into the blood. The particles contain apoA 1 used for cholesterol recov
ery from fatty streaks in the blood vessels. HDL also carry apoE and apoC II,
but those apoproteins are primarily to donate temporarily to chylomicrons and
VLDL.
22
CHAPTER 15 | LIPID SYNTHESIS AND STORAGE
• Lecithin–cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) (or PCAT, phosphatidylcho
line–cholesterol acyltransferase) is an enzyme in the blood that is activated
by apoA 1 on HDL.
– LCAT adds a fatty acid to cholesterol, producing cholesterol esters,
which dissolve in the core of the HDL.
– This allows HDL to transport cholesterol from the periphery to the
liver.
• HDL cholesterol esters picked up in the periphery can be distributed to
other lipoprotein particles such as VLDL remnants (IDL), converting them
to LDL. The cholesterol ester transfer protein (CETP) facilitates this
transfer.
• HDL cholesterol picked up in the periphery can also enter cells through a
scavenger receptor, SR B1.
– This receptor is expressed at high levels in hepatocytes and the ste
roidogenic tissues, including ovaries, testes, and areas of the adrenal
HY HY
glands.
– This receptor does not mediate endocytosis of the HDL, but ratherMY MY
transfer of cholesterol into the cell by a mechanism not yet clearly
LY LY
defined.
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Atherosclerosis
The metabolism of LDL and HDL intersects in the production MEDIUaMnd conYtrIoElLD of MEDIUM YIELD
fatty streaks and potential plaques in blood vessels. The figure below illustrates
one model of atherosclerosis involving HDL and LDL at the site ofLOWendotheYliIaElLD LOW YIELD
cell injury. Damage to the endothelium may be related to many factors,
including normal turbulence of the blood, elevated LDL, especially modified
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
or oxidized LDL, free radicals from cigarette smoking, homocysteinemia
(Chapter 17), diabetes (glycation of LDL), and hypertension. RTEhIeNFORaCtEheMroEsNclTe REINFORCEMENT
rotic lesion represents an inflammatory response sharing several characteris
tics with granuloma formation, and not simple deposition of cholesterol in the
blood vessel.
• Endothelial dysfunction increases adhesiveness and permeability of the
endothelium for platelets and leukocytes. Infiltrations involve monocytes
and T cells. Damaged endothelium has procoagulant rather than antico
agulant properties. In some cases, the endothelial lining may become
partially denuded.
• Local inflammation recruits monocytes and macrophages with subse
quent production of reactive oxygen species. LDL can become oxidized
and then taken up, along with other inflammatory debris, by macro
phages, which can become laden with cholesterol (foam cells). Initially the
subendothelial accumulation of cholesterol laden macrophages produces
fatty streaks.
• As the fatty streak enlarges over time, necrotic tissue and free lipid
accumulates, surrounded by epithelioid cells and eventually smooth
muscle cells, an advanced plaque with a fibrous cap. The plaque eventually
begins to occlude the blood vessel, causing ischemia and infarction in the
heart, brain, or extremities.
22
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
• Eventually the fibrous cap may thin, and the plaque becomes unstable,
leading to rupture and thrombosis.
• HDL may be protective by picking up accumulating cholesterol before the
advanced lesion forms. ApoA 1 activates LCAT, which in turn adds a fatty
MedicalGenetics
acid to cholesterol to produce a cholesterol ester that dissolves in the core
of the HDL.
• The HDL may subsequently be picked up by the liver through the apoE
receptor or deliver cholesterol through the scavenger receptor SR B1
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences (reverse cholesterol transport from the periphery to the liver). The HDL
may also transfer the cholesterol to an IDL, reforming a normal, unoxi
dized LDL particle.
Fatty Streak Formation Advanced Plaque
Liver steroidogenic tissues
transfer to IDL Macrophage Fibrous cap
accumulation formation
HDL pick up cholesterol Macrophages phagocytose
(apoA 1 and LCAT) oxidized/damaged LDL
Smooth muscle
migration
Foam cell T Cell Formation of
formation activation necrotic core
Figure I 15 8. LDL, HDL, and Atherogenesis
Figure I 15 7. LDL, HDL, and Atherogenesis
Role of Vitamin E
The oxidation of LDL at sites of endothelial damage is thought to be a major
stimulus for uptake by macrophages. Some studies have shown a protective role of
vitamin E in this process. Vitamin E is a lipid soluble vitamin that acts as an
antioxidant in the lipid phase. In addition to protecting LDL from oxidation,
vitamin E may also prevent peroxidation of membrane lipids. Vitamins C and A
lack this protective effect despite their antioxidant properties.
22
CHAPTER 15 | LIPID SYNTHESIS AND STORAGE
Recall Question
Insulin induced lipoprotein lipase is required for the metabolism of
which of the following particles?
A. Chylomicrons
B. IDL
C. LDL
D. Triglycerides
Answer: A
HYPERLIPIDEMIAS
Excess lipid in the blood can result from a primary genetic deficiency (rare) or as a
secondary consequence of another disease. There are 2 primary hyperlipidemias:
type I hypertriglyceridemia and type IIa hypercholesterolemia.
Table I 15 2. Primary Hyperlipidemias
Lipid Lipoprotein
Elevated in Elevated
Type Deficiency Blood in Blood Comments
I Familial lipoprotein lipase (rare) Triglyceride Chylomicrons Red orange eruptive xanthomas
apoC II (rare) Fatty liver
Autosomal recessive Acute pancreatitis
Abdominal pain after fatty meal
IIa Familial hypercholesterolemia Choles LDL High risk of atherosclerosis and
Autosomal dominant terol coronary artery disease
(Aa 1/500, AA 1/106) LDL Homozygous condition, usually death
receptor (LDL R) deficiency <20 years
Xanthomas of the Achilles tendon
HY Tuberous xanthomas HY on elbows
Xanthelasmas
MY MY
Corneal arcus
LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Type I Hypertriglyceridemia
Rare genetic absence of lipoprotein lipase results in excess triglyceMridEeDIUM inYIEthLeD blood MEDIUM YIELD
and its deposition in several tissues, including liver, skin, and pancreas. Orange
red eruptive xanthomas over the mucous membranes and skin may bLeOWseen.YIELD LOW YIELD
Abdominal pain and acute pancreatitis may occur. Fasting chylomicronemia
produces a milky turbidity in the serum or plasma.
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
Diabetes, alcoholism, and glucose 6 phosphatase deficiency all can produce less
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
severe hypertriglyceridemia with an increase in VLDL and chylomicrons. Factors
contributing to the hyperlipidemia are:
• Decreased glucose and triglyceride uptake in adipose tissue
• Overactive hormone sensitive lipase (Chapter 16)
• Underactive lipoprotein lipase
22
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
HYPERLIPIDEMIA SECONDARY TO DIABETES
A 20 year old man was studying for his final exams and became hungry.
He drove to the nearest fast food restaurant and ordered a double
MedicalGenetics
cheeseburger, extra large French fries, and a large soda. About an hour
later, he developed serious abdominal distress, became nauseated, and
was close to fainting. Upon his arrival at the emergency room, tests
showed that he was hyperglycemic, as well as hypertriglyceridemic. His
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
cholesterol levels were only slightly elevated. Additional information
revealed that he was diabetic, and he recovered quickly after the
administration of insulin.
The most common type of hyperlipidemia is type V, in which patients have
elevated serum triglycerides in VLDL and chylomicrons in response to a
meal containing carbohydrates and fat, respectively. One of the important
regulatory functions of insulin in adipose tissue is promoting lipoprotein
lipase activity by increasing transcription of its gene. Therefore, the
consequence in diabetes is abnormally low levels of lipoprotein lipase and
HY
the inability to adequately degrade the serum triglycerides in lipoproteins to
facilitate the uptake of fatty acids into adipocytes. MY
LY
High Yield H
Type IIa Hypercholesterolemia
(LDL Receptor Deficiency) MEDIUM YIELD ME
This is an autosomal dominant genetic disease affecting 1/500 (heterozygous)
LOW YIELD
individuals in the United States. It is characterized by elevated LDL cholesterol and
increased risk for atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease. Cholesterol deposits
may be seen as: FUNDAMENTALS FUN
• Xanthomas of the Achilles tendon REINFORCEMENT RE
• Subcutaneous tuberous xanthomas over the elbows
• Xanthelasma (lipid in the eyelid)
HY
• Corneal arcus
MY
Homozygous individuals (1/106) often have myocardial infarctions before
LY
20 years of age.
High Yield H
Abetalipoproteinemia (a Hypolipidemia)
Abetalipoproteinemia and hypobetalipoproteinemia are rare coMndEitDioInUsM YtIhEaLtD ME
illustrate the importance of lipid absorption and transport. Patients have low to
absent serum apoB 100 and apoB 48. Serum triglycerides may be nearLOWzeroY,IELDand
cholesterol extremely low.
Because chylomicron levels are very low, fat accumulates in intestinFaUlNDAMENTeAntLeSrocytes FUN
and in hepatocytes. Essential fatty acids and vitamins A and E are not well
REINFORCEMENT R
absorbed. Symptoms in severe cases include:
• Steatorrhea
• Cerebellar ataxia
• Pigmentary degeneration in the retina
230
CHAPTER 15 | LIPID SYNTHESIS AND STORAGE
• Acanthocytes (thorny appearing erythrocytes)
• Possible loss of night vision
CHOLESTEROL METABOLISM
Cholesterol is required for membrane synthesis, steroid and vitamin D synthesis,
and in the liver, bile acid synthesis. Most cells derive their cholesterol from LDL or
HDL, but some cholesterol may be synthesized de novo. Most de novo synthesis
occurs in the liver, where cholesterol is synthesized from acetyl CoA in the
cytoplasm. The citrate shuttle carries mitochondrial acetyl CoA into the cyto
plasm, and NADPH is provided by the HMP shunt and malic enzyme.
BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
(2C) Acetyl CoA
Treatment of Hypercholesterolemia
Cholestyramine and other drugs that
increase elimination of bile salts force the
(4C) Acetoacetyl CoA
liver to increase their synthesis from
cholesterol, thus lowering the internal level
of cholesterol in the hepatocytes. Decreased
Gene repressed by cholesterol cholesterol within the cell increases LDL
(6C) HMG - CoA receptor expression, allowing the hepatocyte
to remove more LDL cholesterol from the
HMG - CoA reductase – Glucagon
blood.
(ER) + Insulin
HMG CoA reductase inhibitors such as
– Statin drugs
(6C) Mevalonate
atorvastatin and simvastatin inhibit de novo
cholesterol synthesis in the hepatocyte,
which subsequently increases LDL receptor
(15C) Farnesyl PPi Farnesyl PPi important for: expression
• Synthesis of CoQ (ETC)
• Synthesis of dolichol PPi for
(30C) Squalene N linked glycosylation of proteins
(30C) Lanosterol
NADPH
Cell membranes
(27C) Cholesterol
Vitamin D
Bile acids
Steroids (liver)
(adrenal, ovaries, testes)
Figure FiguIre15 I 91.5 S8.yntShyesnitshesis ofofChoClehsotelerostlerol
231
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
3 hydroxy 3 methylglutaryl (HMG) CoA reductase on the smooth endoplasmic
reticulum (SER) is the rate limiting enzyme. Insulin activates the enzyme (dephos
phorylation), and glucagon inhibits it. Mevalonate is the product, and the statin
drugs competitively inhibit the enzyme. Cholesterol represses the expression of the
MedicalGenetics HMG CoA reductase gene and also increases degradation of the enzyme.
Farnesyl pyrophosphate, an intermediate in the pathway, may also be used for:
• Synthesis of CoQ for the mitochondrial electron transport chain
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
• Synthesis of dolichol pyrophosphate, a required cofactor in N linked
glycosylation of proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum
• Prenylation of proteins (a posttranslational modification) that need to be
held in the cell membrane by a lipid tail. An example is the p21ras G
protein in the insulin and growth factor pathways.
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA
A 55 year old man went to see his physician for his annual checkup.
Over the past 5 years, his bloodwork consistently showed that his total
cholesterol was slightly high (205–220 mg/dL), HDL 45–50 mg/dL, and
LDL 145 mg/dL. Serum C reactive protein (CRP) value was always within
normal range. Despite considerable efforts to lower his total cholesterol
and LDL (exercise, 1 glass of wine per day, and a carefully controlled
diet), his blood cholesterol values did not significantly change. No other
problems were evident. He recently heard that the ideal blood level of
LDL should be <100 mg/dL. His physician decided to prescribe a statin
drug. Within several weeks of taking the statin, the patient experienced
more than usual muscle soreness, pain, and weakness when he exercised.
He also noticed that his urine was red brown.
For a large majority of people, statin drugs work efficiently and without
side effects. Maximum lowering of blood cholesterol takes about 4–6 weeks.
Because the liver is the site of most cholesterol synthesis, LFTs should be
measured 2–3 months after starting the statin regimen. One consequence of
statins inhibiting HMG CoA reductase is the lessening of the downstream
synthesis of CoQ, which is needed for the electron transport chain. Without
properly functioning mitochondria, muscle would have a decreased ability to
generate ATP required for muscle contraction. The red brown urine is caused
by the spillage of myoglobin from damaged muscle cells. CRP is a liver protein
that is secreted in inflammation. There is a direct correlation between elevated
CRP and atherosclerosis.
23
CHAPTER 15 | LIPID SYNTHESIS AND STORAGE
Review Questions
Select the ONE best answer.
1. What is the most positive activator of the process shown below?
8 Acetyl CoA + n ATP + 14 NADPH → palmitate + 8 CoASH + nADP + nPi + 14 NADP
A. Acetyl CoA
B. Citrate
C. Malonyl CoA
D. Malate
E. Oxaloacetate
2. When adipose tissue stores triglyceride arriving from the liver or intestine,
glycolysis must also occur in the adipocyte. Which of the following prod
ucts or intermediates of glycolysis is required for fat storage?
A. Glycerol
B. Glucose 6 phosphate
C. Pyruvate
D. Acetyl CoA
E. Dihydroxyacetone phosphate
Items 3 and 4
Abetalipoproteinemia is a genetic disorder characterized by malabsorption of
dietary lipid, steatorrhea (fatty stools), accumulation of intestinal triglyceride,
and hypolipoproteinemia.
3. A deficiency in the production of which apoprotein would most likely
account for this clinical presentation?
A. ApoB 100
B. ApoB 48
C. ApoC II
D. ApoA I
E. ApoE
4. Patients with abetalipoproteinemia exhibit membrane abnormalities in their
erythrocytes with production of acanthocytes (thorny appearing cells). This
unusual red cell morphology would most likely result from malabsorption of
A. palmitic acid
B. ascorbic acid
C. arachidonic acid
D. folic acid
E. linoleic acid
23
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
5. A patient with a history of recurring attacks of pancreatitis, eruptive xan
thomas, and increased plasma triglyceride levels (2,000 mg/dl) associated
with chylomicrons, most likely has a deficiency in
A. lipoprotein lipase
MedicalGenetics
B. LDL receptors
C. HMG CoA reductase
D. apoB 48
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences E. apoB 100 receptor
6. Uncontrolled phagocytosis of oxidized LDL particles is a major stimulus for
the development of foam cells and fatty streaks in the vascular subendothe
lium. This process may be inhibited by increased dietary intake of
A. vitamin E
B. vitamin B6
C. vitamin D
D. vitamin B12
E. vitamin K
Items 7–9
A 42 year old man presents with a chief complaint of intermittent claudication
during exercise. His family history is significant for the presence of cardiovascu
lar disease on his father’s side, but not on his mother’s side. Physical exam reveals
xanthelasmas and bilateral tendon xanthomas. A plasma lipid profile reveals
cholesterol level 340 mg/dL, with a high LDL/HDL ratio. He is given instructions
for dietary modifications and a prescription for simvastatin.
7. The clinical findings noted in this patient are most likely caused by defi
cient production of
A. lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase
B. apoB 100 receptors
C. fatty acyl CoA synthetase
D. VLDL from LDL
E. cholesterol ester transfer protein
8. The anticholesterolemic action of simvastatin is based on its effectiveness as
a competitive inhibitor of the rate limiting enzyme in cholesterol biosyn
thesis. The reaction product normally produced by this enzyme is
A. squalene
B. methylmalonate
C. lanosterol
D. mevalonate
E. acetoacetate
23
CHAPTER 15 | LIPID SYNTHESIS AND STORAGE
9. From a Lineweaver Burk plot, the Km and Vmax of this rate limiting enzyme
were calculated to be 4 × 10 3 M and 8 × 102 mmol/h, respectively. If the
given experiment is repeated in the presence of simvastatin, which of the
following values would be obtained?
Km (M) Vmax (mmol/h)
A. 4 × 10 3 3 × 102
B. 2 × 10 3 1 × 102
C. 4 × 10 3 9 × 102
D. 8 × 10 3 8 × 102
E. 8 × 10 3 9 × 102
10. A 20 year old man is taken to the university clinic to determine the cause
of recurring hyperlipidemia, proteinuria, and anemia. Fasting blood tests
reveal slightly elevated concentrations of unesterified cholesterol and
phosphatidylcholine. The patient is given a 100 gram chocolate bar and
blood lipid levels are monitored hourly. Results reveal significantly
increased levels of unesterified cholesterol and phosphatidylcholine for
extended periods. Deficiency of which of the following proteins is most
likely to be associated with these observations?
A. Acyl CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase (ACAT)
B. Apoprotein A 1
C. Apoprotein B48
D. Apoprotein B100
E. Lipoprotein lipase
23
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Answers
1. Answer: B. Citrate is a potent activator of acetyl CoA carboxylase for fatty
acid synthesis.
MedicalGenetics
2. Answer: E. To reform triglycerides from the incoming fatty acids, glycerol
3 P must be available. The adipose can produce this only from DHAP in
glycolysis.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences 3. Answer: B. ApoB 48 is required for intestinal absorption of dietary fat in
the form of chylomicrons. ApoB 100 formation is also impaired in these
patients, but this would not explain the clinical symptoms described.
4. Answer: E. The genetic defect would result in malabsorption of the 3 fatty
acids listed, but only linoleate is strictly essential in the diet. Absorption of
water soluble ascorbate and folate would not be significantly affected.
5. Answer: A. These are the clinical features of lipoprotein lipase deficiency
(type I lipoproteinemia). LDL receptor defects would result in elevated
LDLs. HMG CoA reductase and ApoB 100 have no direct relationship to
chylomicrons. ApoB 48 deficiency would result in decreased production of
chylomicrons.
6. Answer: A. Only vitamin E is an antioxidant.
7. Answer: B. The findings are indicative of heterozygous type lla familial
hypercholesterolemia, an autosomal dominant disease. Deficient CETP,
LCAT or fatty acid CoA synthetase would not elevate LDL cholesterol.
VLDL are not produced from LDL.
8. Answer: D. Mevalonate precedes squalene and lanosterol in the pathway,
and methylmalonate and acetoacetate are not associated with cholesterol
genesis.
9. Answer: D. With a competitive inhibitor, there will be an increase in Km
with no change in Vmax. Choice A would be for a noncompetitive inhibitor
(Vmax decreased, Km unaltered).
10. Answer: B. Apo A 1 is present on the surface of HDL and functions to
activate circulating LCAT (lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase) to esterify
cholesterol, using lecithin (phosphatidylcholine) as the fatty acid donor.
Esterification of cholesterol in blood occurs to trap the resultant cholesterol
esters in HDL where they can subsequently be transferred to other lipopro
teins (IDL) or taken up directly by hepatocytes and steroidogenic tissues.
Deficiencies of apoprotein B100 and apoprotein B48 (choices D and C)
result in abetalipoproteinemia characterized by decreased blood triglycer
ides and cholesterol.
ACAT (choice A) is an intracellular enzyme and esterifies cholesterol
inside cells, but not in blood.
Deficiency of LPL (choice E) would result in type 1 hyperlipidemia and is
characterized by elevated serum triglycerides.
23
16 #
Lipid Mobilization and Catabolism
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Understand the concept of lipid mobilization
❏ Interpret scenarios about fatty acid oxidation
❏ Demonstrate understanding of ketone body metabolism
❏ Know the sphingolipidoses
BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
LIPID MOBILIzATION
Niacin is a commonly used
In the postabsorptive state, fatty acids can be released from adipose tissue to be
used for energy. The fall in insulin activates a hormone sensitive triacylglycerol antihyperlipidemic drug. In large doses
lipase (HSL) that hydrolyzes triglycerides, yielding fatty acids and glycerol. (gram level quantities that are well above
Epinephrine and cortisol also activate HSL. the RDA), it works by inhibiting HSL in
adipose tissue. With fewer fatty acids
Glycerol may be picked up by liver and converted to dihydroxyacetone phosphate
(DHAP) for gluconeogenesis, and the fatty acids are distributed to tissues that can entering the liver, VLDL will not be
use them. Free fatty acids are transported through the blood in association with assembled in normal amounts. Both VLDL
serum albumin. (carrying triglycerides and cholesterol) and
its product, LDL, will be lower in serum.
23
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Insulin
Epinephrine Glucagon
MedicalGenetics Cortisol Cortisol
+ +
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Gluconeogenesis
Hormone
Glycerol Glycerol Glycerol Glucose
sensitive
lipase
TGL
β Oxidation
Fatty Fatty acids Fatty
Acetyl CoA
acids Albumin acids
Ketogenesis
Ketone Ketone Citric
bodies bodies acid
cycle
Muscle
Adipose Liver
(brain)
Figure I 16 1. Lipolysis of Triglyceride in
Figure I 16 1. Lipolysis of Triglyceride in
Response to Hypoglycemia and Stress
Response to Hypoglycemia and Stress
FATTY ACID OXIDATION
Fatty acids are oxidized in several tissues, including liver, muscle, and adipose
tissue, by the pathway of β oxidation. Neither erythrocytes nor brain can use fatty
acids and so continue to rely on glucose during normal periods of fasting. Eryth
rocytes lack mitochondria, and fatty acids do not cross the blood–brain barrier
efficiently.
Short chain fatty acids (2–4 carbons) and medium chain fatty acids (6–12
carbons) diffuse freely into mitochondria to be oxidized. Long chain fatty acids
(14–20 carbons) are transported into the mitochondrion by a carnitine shuttle to
be oxidized. Very long chain fatty acids (>20 carbons) enter peroxisomes via an
unknown mechanism for oxidation.
23
MY MY
CLHYAPTER 16 | LIPID MOBILIzATIONLY AND CATABOLISM
Fatty Acid Entry into Mitochondria High Yield NOTE HIGH YIELD
Long chain fatty acids must be activated and transported into MthEeDIUMmitochondriYa.IELD CarnitineMEDIUMacyltransferaYseIELD 1 and -2 (CAT 1
Fatty acyl CoA synthetase, on the outer mitochondrial membrane, activates the and CAT 2) are also referred to as carnitine
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
fatty acids by attaching CoA. The fatty acyl portion is then transferred onto
palmitoyl transferase 1 and -2 (CPT 1 and
carnitine by carnitine acyltransferase 1 for transport into the mitochondria. The
CPT 2). The carnitine transport system is
sequence of events includes the following steps:
FUNDAMENTALS most iFmUpNoDrtaAnMtENTALSfor allowing long chain fatty
• Fatty acyl synthetase activates the fatty acid (outer mitochondrial acids to enter into the mitochondria.
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
membrane).
• Carnitine acyltransferase 1 transfers the fatty acyl group to carnitine
NOTE
(outer mitochondrial membrane).
β oxidation of palmitate (16:0) yields
• Fatty acylcarnitine is shuttled across the inner membrane.
8 acetyl CoA.
• Carnitine acyltransferase 2 transfers the fatty acyl group back to a CoA
(mitochondrial matrix).
COO
Carnitine acyltransferase 1 is inhibited by malonyl CoA from fatty acid synthesis }
HY CH2 HY
and thereby prevents newly synthesized fatty acids from entering the mitochon
CH2
dria. Insulin indirectly inhibits β oxidation by activating acetyl CoA carboxylaseMY } MY
(fatty acid synthesis) and increasing the malonyl CoA concentration in the CH2
cytoplasm. Glucagon reverses this process. LY CH2 LY
}
CH2
High Yield CH2 HIGH YIELD 8 Acetyl CoA
β Oxidation in Mitochondria
}
CH2
β oxidation reverses the process of fatty acid synthesis by oxidizingMEDIUM (rather YIELDthan MEDIUM YIELD
reducing) and releasing (rather than linking) units of acetyl CoA. The pathway is a CH2
}
repetition of 4 steps. Each 4 step cycle releases one acetyl CoA and reLdOucWes YIELNDAD CH2 LOW YIELD
and FAD (producing NADH and FADH2).
CH2
}
FUNDAMENTALS CH2FUNDAMENTALS
The FADH2 and NADH are oxidized in the electron transport chain, providing
ATP. In muscle and adipose tissue, the acetyl CoA enters the citric acid cycle. In CH2
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
}
liver, the ATP may be used for gluconeogenesis, and the acetyl CoA (which cannot
CH2
be converted to glucose) stimulates gluconeogenesis by activating pyruvate
CH2
carboxylase. }
CH3
In a fasting state, the liver produces more acetyl CoA from β oxidation than is
used in the citric acid cycle. Much of the acetyl CoA is used to synthesize ketone
bodies (essentially 2 acetyl CoA groups linked together) that are released into the
blood for other tissues.
23
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
MedicalGenetics
Outer Inner Mitochondrial
Membrane Membrane Matrix
ADP + Pi
ATP synthase
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
ATP
FA
NADH
ETC CoQ
dehydrogenase
FA
ATP
FAD FADH2 NAD NADH
CoA
Fatty acyl CoA
synthetase FA CoA Acetyl CoA
Fatty acyl CoA
AMP
dehydrogenase Liver
+ PPi
(LCAD, MCAD)
FA CoA
(VLCAD, SCAD)
Ketones Citric
Carnitine
Multiple cycles
acid cycle
acyltransferase 1
CoA Carnitine acyltransferase 2
FA carnitine FA carnitine
Carnitine
transporter
Myopathic CAT/CPT Deficiency MCAD Deficiency
• Muscle aches, weakness • Fasting hypoglycemia
• Myoglobinuria • No ketone bodies (hypoketosis)
• Provoked by prolonged exercise, • C8–C10 acyl carnitines in blood
especially if fasting • Vomiting
• Biopsy: elevated muscle triglyceride • Coma, death
• Most common form: AR, late onset • AR with variable expression
• Dicarboxylic aciduria
Figure I 16Figur2e. FaItty16 2.AcFidatty AAcctiidvatioAnc,tivation, TTrarannssppoortr,t, and anβd OxidβationOxidation
24
CHAPTER 16 | LIPID MOBILIzATION AND CATABOLISM
Genetic deficiencies of fatty acid oxidation BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY
Two of the most common genetic deficiencies affecting fatty acid oxidation are It is now believed that some cases of
medium chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency, primary etiology sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) are
hepatic, and myopathic carnitine acyltransferase (CAT/CPT) deficiency,
due to MCAD deficiency. The incidence of
primary etiology myopathic.
MCAD deficiency is one of the highest of the
• MCAD deficiency: Non ketotic hypoglycemia should be strongly associ inborn errors of metabolism (estimated at
ated with a block in hepatic β oxidation. During fasting, hypoglycemia 1/10,000).
can become profound due to lack of ATP to support gluconeogenesis.
Decreased acetyl CoA lowers pyruvate carboxylase activity and also limits
ketogenesis. Hallmarks of this disease include:
– Profound fasting hypoglycemia
– Low to absent ketones
– Lethargy, coma, death if untreated
– C8–C10 acyl carnitines in blood
– In an infant, episode may be provoked by overnight fast; in an older
child, often provoked by illness (flu) that causes loss of appetite and
vomiting
– Primary treatment: IV glucose
– Prevention: frequent feeding, high carbohydrate, low fat diet
Most patients lead reasonable lives if they take frequent carbohydrate
meals to avoid periods of hypoglycemia. Complications arise when fatty
meals are ingested and the MCAD enzyme is required to catabolize them.
Also, in times of metabolic stress induced by severe fasting, exercise, or
infection (conditions with high demands on fatty acid oxidation), symp
toms of MCAD deficiency are manifested.
• CAT 2/CPT 2 (myopathic form adolescent or adult onset): Although all
tissues with mitochondria contain carnitine acyltransferase, the most
common form of this genetic deficiency is myopathic and due to a defect
in the muscle specific CAT/CPT gene. It is an autosomal recessive condi
tion with late onset. Hallmarks of this disease include:
– Muscle aches; mild to severe weakness
– Rhabdomyolysis, myoglobinuria, “red urine”
– Episode provoked by prolonged exercise especially after fasting, cold, or
associated stress
– Symptoms may be exacerbated by high fat, low carbohydrate diet
– Muscle biopsy shows elevated muscle triglyceride detected as lipid
droplets in cytoplasm
– Primary treatment: cease muscle activity and give glucose
A somewhat similar syndrome to CAT 2/CPT 2 can be produced by
muscle carnitine deficiency secondary to a defect in the transport system
for carnitine in muscle.
24
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
CLINICAL CORRELATE
MCAD DEFICIENCY
Ackee, a fruit grown in Jamaica and West
A 6 year old suffered gastroenteritis for 3 days that culminated in a brief
Africa, contains hypoglycin, a toxin that acts
generalized seizure, which left him semicomatose. Admitting blood
MedicalGeneatiscs an inhibitor of fatty acyl CoA dehydroge
glucose was 45 mg/dL (0.25 mM), and urine was negative for glucose and
nase. Jamaican vomiting sickness and severe
ketones. Intravenous glucose improved his condition within 10 minutes.
hypoglycemia can result if it is ingested.
Subsequent bloodwork revealed elevated C8–C10 acyl carnitines.
Symptoms include sudden onset of vomiting
Following a diagnosis of an enzyme deficiency, the boy’s parents were
BehavioralScience/So2c–ia6lScienhcoeusrs after ingesting an ackee contain
cautioned to make sure that he eats meals frequently.
ing meal. After a period of prostration that
The presence of severe hypoglycemia and absence of ketosis (hypoketosis)
may last as long as 18 hours, more vomiting
is strongly suggestive of a block in β oxidation. The episode in this case was
may occur, followed by convulsions, coma,
precipitated by the 3 day gastroenteritis (vomiting/fasting). The elevated
and even death.
C8–C10 acyl carnitines accumulate due to the defective MCAD and they leak
HY
into serum. These compounds are detected using sophisticated tandem mass
spectrometry. MY
LY
High Yield H
Propionic Acid Pathway
Fatty acids with an odd number of carbon atoms are oxidized bMyEDIβUMoxidationYIELD ME
identically to even carbon fatty acids. The difference results only from the final
LOW YIELD
cycle, in which even carbon fatty acids yield 2 acetyl CoA (from the 4 carbon
fragment remaining) but odd carbon fatty acids yield one acetyl CoA and one
propionyl CoA (from the 5 carbon fragment remaining).
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
Propionyl CoA is converted to succinyl CoA, a citric acid cycle intermediate, in
REINFORCEMENT RE
the 2 step propionic acid pathway. Because this extra succinyl CoA can form
malate and enter the cytoplasm and gluconeogenesis, odd carbon fatty acids
represent an exception to the rule that fatty acids cannot be converted to glucose
in humans. The propionic acid pathway includes 2 important enzymes, both in the
mitochondria:
• Propionyl CoA carboxylase requires biotin
• Methylmalonyl CoA mutase requires vitamin B12, cobalamin
Vitamin B12 deficiency can cause a megaloblastic anemia of the same type seen in
folate deficiency (chapter 17). In a patient with megaloblastic anemia, it is impor
tant to determine the underlying cause because B12 deficiency, if not corrected,
produces a peripheral neuropathy owing to aberrant fatty acid incorporation into
the myelin sheets associated with inadequate methylmalonyl CoA mutase activity.
Excretion of methylmalonic acid indicates a vitamin B12 deficiency rather than
folate.
24
CHAPTER 16 | LIPID MOBILIzATION AND CATABOLISM
Propionyl CoA Methylmalonyl CoA
CH3 carboxylase (biotin) mutase (B12)
Propionyl CoA Methylmalonyl CoA Succinyl CoA
CH3 CH2
In vitamin B12
CH2 CH2
deficiency
CH2 CH2
Methylmalonic Citric acid
C = O C = O aciduria cycle
S - CoA S - CoA
from from
even C odd C
fatty fatty
acid acid
β oxidation
Figure I 16 3. Propionic Acid Pathway
Figure I 16 3. The Propionic Acid Pathway
KETONE BODY METABOLISM
In the fasting state, the liver converts excess acetyl CoA from β oxidation of fatty
acids into ketone bodies, acetoacetate and 3 hydroxybutyrate (β hydroxybutyrate),
which are used by extrahepatic tissues. Cardiac and skeletal muscles and renal
cortex metabolize acetoacetate and 3 hydroxybutyrate to acetyl CoA.
Normally during a fast, muscle metabolizes ketones as rapidly as the liver releases
them, preventing their accumulation in blood.
After a week of fasting, ketones reach a concentration in blood high enough for the
brain to begin metabolizing them. If ketones increase sufficiently in the blood,
they can lead to ketoacidosis.
24
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
β Oxidation
FA CoA Acetyl CoA
HMG CoA synthase
MedicalGenetics
HMG CoA
HMG CoA lyase
Liver
Acetoacetate Acetone
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences NADH
NAD
Mitochondrial
3 Hydroxybutyrate
Matrix
(β Hydroxybutyrate)
Cytoplasm
Acetoacetate 3 Hydroxybutyrate Acetone Blood
Cytoplasm
Muscle
Renal cortex
Mitochondrial Brain in prolonged fast
Matrix
Acetoacetate 3 Hydroxybutyrate
Activation of
NADH NAD
acetoacetate
in extrahepatic
tissues
Acetoacetyl CoA
2 Acetyl CoA Citric acid cycle
HY
MY
Figure I 16 4. Ketogenesis (Liver) and Ketogenolysis (Extrahepatic) LY
Figure I 16 4. Ketogenesis (Liver) and Ketogenolysis (Extrahepatic)
High Yield H
CLINICAL CORRELATE Ketogenesis
In untreated type 1 diabetes mellitus, there Ketogenesis occurs in mitochondria of hepatocytes when excess MEDaIUceMtyl CYoIAELD ME
is no insulin. Although glucose may be high, accumulates in the fasting state. HMG CoA synthase forms HMG CoA, and
HMG CoA lyase breaks HMG CoA into acetoacetate, which can subseLquOeWntly YIELD be
no insulin is released, HSL is active, HY
reduced to 3 hydroxybutyrate. Acetone is a minor side product formed
β oxidation is not inhibited, and ketone
nonenzymatically but is not used as a fuel in tissues. It does, however, impart MY a
bodies are generated. FUNDAMENTALS FUN
strong odor (sweet or fruity) to the breath, which is almost diagnostic for
ketoacidosis. REINFORCEMENT LY RE
High Yield H
Ketogenolysis
Acetoacetate picked up from the blood is activated in the mitochonMdriEaDIUM YbIyELD ME
succinyl CoA acetoacetyl CoA transferase (common name thiophorase), an
LOW YIELD
enzyme present only in extrahepatic tissues; 3 hydroxybutyrate is first oxidized to
acetoacetate. Because the liver lacks this enzyme, it cannot metabolize the ketone
bodies.
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
REINFORCEMENT R
244
CHAPTER 16 | LIPID MOBILIzATION AND CATABOLISM
The figure below shows the major pathways producing fuel for the brain. Note
the important times at which the brain switches from:
• Glucose derived from liver glycogenolysis to glucose derived from gluco
neogenesis (~12 hours)
• Glucose derived from gluconeogenesis to ketones derived from fatty acids
(~1 week)
In the brain, when ketones are metabolized to acetyl CoA, pyruvate dehydroge
nase is inhibited. Glycolysis and subsequently glucose uptake in brain decreases.
This important switch spares body protein (which otherwise would be catabolized
to form glucose by gluconeogenesis in the liver) by allowing the brain to indirectly
metabolize fatty acids as ketone bodies.
Glyco
Protein Fat
gen
(minor protein component)
100
Glucose from
Ketones
gluconeogenesis
Brai
for
Fuel 50
of
%
Glucose from
Glucose from
liver glycogen
gluconeogenesis
Ketones
1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 6
HY HY
Days Weeks
MY MY
Figure I 16 5. Fuel Use in the Brain During Fasting and Starvation
Figure I 16 5. Fuel Use in the Brain During Fasting and Starvation LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Ketoacidosis
• In patients with type 1 insulin dependent diabetes mellitusMEDIUMnot aYdeIEquLaDtely MEDIUM YIELD
treated with insulin, fatty acid release from adipose tissue and ketone
synthesis in the liver exceed the ability of other tissues to metabLolOizWe YIELDthem, LOW YIELD
and a profound, life threatening ketoacidosis may occur. An infection or
trauma (causing an increase in cortisol and epinephrine) may precipitate
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
an episode of ketoacidosis by activating HSL.
• Patients with type 2 non–insulin dependent diabetes mellitRusEINFORCE(NMIDENDTM) REINFORCEMENT
are much less likely to show ketoacidosis. The basis for this observation is NOTE
not completely understood, although type 2 disease has a much slower,
In certain populations with NIDDM,
insidious onset, and insulin resistance in the periphery is usually not
ketoacidosis is much more common than
complete. Type 2 diabetics can develop ketoacidosis after an infection or
previously appreciated.
trauma.
245
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Patients who abuse alcohol can also develop ketoacidosis. Chronic hypoglycemia,
which is often present in chronic alcoholism, favors fat release from adipose.
Ketone production increases in the liver, but utilization in muscle may be slower
than normal because alcohol is converted to acetate in the liver, diffuses into the
MedicalGenetics blood, and oxidized by muscle as an alternative source of acetyl CoA.
Associated with ketoacidosis:
CLINICAL CORRELATE
• Polyuria, dehydration, and thirst (exacerbated by hyperglycemia and
Insulin facilitates uptake of potassium by
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences osmotic diuresis)
cells, so K+ levels may be normal before
• CNS depression and coma
DKA is treated with insulin. Once insulin is
• Potential depletion of K+ (although loss may be masked by a mild hyper
administered, however, blood potassium
kalemia)
levels need to be monitored.
• Decreased plasma bicarbonate
• Breath with a sweet or fruity odor, acetone
Laboratory measurement of ketones should be done regularly. In normal ketosis
(which accompanies fasting and does not produce an acidosis), acetoacetate and
β hydroxybutyrate are formed in approximately equal quantities.
In pathologic conditions such as diabetes and alcoholism, ketoacidosis may
develop with life threatening consequences. In diabetic and alcoholic ketoacidosis,
the ratio between acetoacetate and β hydroxybutyrate shifts, and
β hydroxybutyrate predominates.
• The urinary nitroprusside test detects only acetoacetate and can dramati
cally underestimate the extent of ketoacidosis and its resolution during
treatment.
• β hydroxybutyrate should be measured.
Home monitors of both blood glucose and β hydroxybutyrate are available for
diabetic patients.
Recall Question
Inhibition of which of the following enzymes is responsible for the
peripheral neuropathy involved in vitamin B12 deficiency?
A. Carnitine acyltransferase 1
B. Carnitine acyltransferase 2
C. Medium chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase
D. Methylmalonyl CoA mutase
E. Propionyl CoA carboxylase
Answer: D
24
CHAPTER 16 | LIPID MOBILIzATION AND CATABOLISM
SPHINGOLIPIDS
Sphingolipids are important constituents of cell membranes. Although they
contain no glycerol, they are similar in structure to the glycerophospholipids in
that they have a hydrophilic region and 2 fatty acid–derived hydrophobic tails.
The various classes of sphingolipids differ primarily in the nature of the hydro
philic region.
• Sphingomyelin: phosphorylcholine
• Cerebrosides: galactose or glucose
• Gangliosides: branched oligosaccharide chains terminating in the
9 carbon sugar, sialic acid (N acetylneuraminic acid, NANA)
from serine
Sphingosine
from fatty acid
Fatty Acyl CoA
Ceramide
CDP Choline UDP Glucose
UDP Galactose
P Choline glc gal
Sphingomyelin Cerebrosides
UDP Sugars
CMP Sialic Acid
(N acetylneuraminic NAc
acid, NANA) gal
sialic
acid
Gangliosides gal
(glycolipid)
glc
Figure I 16 7. Synthesis of Sphingolipids
Figure I 16 6. Synthesis of Sphingolipids
24
Immunology
MY
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY LY
Biochemistry
High Yield H
Genetic Deficiencies of Enzymes in
Sphingolipid Catabolism MEDIUM YIELD ME
Sphingolipids released when membrane is degraded are digested in endosomes
LOW YIELD
MedicalGenetics after fusion with lysosomes. Lysosomes contain many enzymes, each of which
removes specific groups from individual sphingolipids. Genetic deficiencies of
many of these enzymes are known, and the diseases share some FUoNfDAthMeENTAchLaSracteris FUN
tics of I cell disease discussed in Chapter 4.
REINFORCEMENT RE
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Table I 16 1. Genetic Deficiencies of Sphingolipid Catabolism
Lysosomal
Substrate Accumulating
Disease Enzyme Missing in Inclusion Body Symptoms
Tay Sachs Hexosaminidase A Ganglioside GM2 • Cherry red spots in macula
• Blindness
• Psychomotor retardation
• Death usually <2 years
• Startle reflex
Gaucher Glucocerebrosidase Glucocerebroside • Type 1 (99%): adult hepatosplenomegaly
• Erosion of bones, fractures
• Pancytopenia or thrombocytopenia
• Characteristic macrophages
• (crumpled paper inclusions)
Niemann Pick Sphingomyelinase Sphingomyelin • May see cherry red spot in macula
• Hepatosplenomegaly
• Microcephaly, severe intellectual
disability
• Foamy macrophages with zebra bodies
• Early death
24
CHAPTER 16 | LIPID MOBILIzATION AND CATABOLISM
GAUCHER DISEASE
A 9 year old boy of Ashkenazic Jewish descent was brought to the
university hospital because he was extremely lethargic and bruised easily.
The attending physician noted massive hepatomegaly and splenomegaly,
marked pallor, and hematologic complications. A histologic examination
obtained from bone marrow showed a “wrinkled” appearance of the
cytoplasm and that the cytoplasm was highly PAS stain positive. White
cells were taken to assay for glucocerebrosidase, and the activity of the
enzyme was found to be markedly below normal.
Outside the brain, glucocerebroside arises mainly from the breakdown of
old red and white blood cells. In the brain, glucocerebroside arises from the
turnover of gangliosides during brain development and formation of the
myelin sheath. Without the proper degradation of glucocerebroside due to a
lack of glucocerebrosidase, it accumulates in cells and tissues responsible for
its turnover. This results in “wrinkled paper” cytoplasm and carbohydrate
positive staining. The easy bruising is due to a low blood platelet count, and
the lethargy is due to the anemia.
Highly effective enzyme replacement therapy is available for Gaucher patients.
Enzyme replacement results in the reduction of hepatosplenomegaly, skeletal
abnormalities, and other Gaucher associated problems. The major drawback
of therapy using intravenously administered recombinant glucocerebrosidase
is its prohibitive cost (several hundred thousand dollars per year).
Fabry Disease
NOTE
In contrast to the other sphingolipidoses (Tay Sachs, Gaucher, Niemann Pick)
Study sphingolipid catabolism for the exam.
which are all autosomal recessive, Fabry disease is the only one that is X linked
Be sure to know the diseases and their
recessive. Fabry is caused by a mutation in the gene that encodes the lysosomal
enzyme alpha galactosidase. Ceramide trihexoside accumulates in the lysosomes. clinical symptoms, enzyme that’s missing,
Fabry disease presents during childhood or adolescence: and the substrate that accumulates.
• Burning sensations in the hands which gets worse with exercise and hot
weather
• Small, raised reddish purple blemishes on the skin (angiokeratomas)
• Eye manifestations, especially cloudiness of the cornea
• Impaired arterial circulation and increased risk of heart attack or stroke
• Enlargement of the heart and kidneys
• Often there is survival into adulthood but with increased risk of cardio
vascular disease, stroke.
• Renal failure is often the cause of death.
Enzyme replacement therapy is available and, although expensive, slows the
progression of the disease.
24
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Review Questions
Select the ONE best answer.
1. As part of a study to quantify contributors of stress to hyperglycemia and
MedicalGenetics
ketosis in diabetes, normal hepatocytes and adipocytes in tissue culture
were treated with cortisol and analyzed by Northern blotting using a gene
specific probe. The results of one experiment are shown below.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Hepatocytes Adipocytes
Cortisol (nM) Cortisol (nM)
0 100 500 1000 0 100 500 1000
Figure SQ XVI 1
The 32P probe used in this experiment most likely binds to a mRNA
encoding
A. phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
B. lipoprotein lipase
C. glucokinase
D. hormone sensitive lipase
E. acetyl CoA carboxylase
2. A child is diagnosed with a congenital deficiency of medium chain acyl
CoA dehydrogenase activity. Which of the following signs or symptoms
would most likely occur upon fasting in this child?
A. Hypolacticacidemia
B. Ketoacidosis
C. Hyperglycemia
D. Dicarboxylic acidosis
E. Hyperchylomicronemia
3. A 3 year old child complains of muscle pain and weakness while in the
playground and is admitted to the hospital for examination. Tests reveal
slight hepatomegaly and cardiomegaly. A liver biopsy shows extreme but
nonspecific fatty changes, and a muscle biopsy contains large amounts of
cytoplasmic vacuoles containing neutral lipid. A one day fast is performed
and shows a drop in blood glucose levels without a corresponding produc
tion of ketone bodies. The pH of the blood is normal. Which of the follow
ing diagnoses might account for this child’s problems?
A. Bilirubin diglucuronide transporter deficiency
B. Glucose 6 phosphatase deficiency
C. Mitochondrial 3 hydroxy 3 methylglutaryl CoA synthase deficiency
D. Systemic carnitine deficiency
E. Vitamin D deficiency
25
CHAPTER 16 | LIPID MOBILIzATION AND CATABOLISM
Items 4–6
gluconeogenesis
glycogenolysis
ketogenesis ketogenesis
A. B.
gluconeogenesis
24 48 72 10 15 20 25 24 48 72 10 15 20 25
hrs days hrs days
glycogenolysis glycogenolysis gluconeogenesis
ketogenesis
gluconeogenesis
C. D.
24 48 72 10 15 20 25 24 48 72 10 15 20 25
hrs days hrs days
In the options above, each graph depicts the primary source of fuel used by the
brain during fasting/starvation. For each condition listed below, select the most
closely matched graph.
4. Normal individual
5. Liver phosphorylase deficiency
6. Hepatic fructose 1,6 bisphosphatase deficiency
Items 7–9
A 54 year old man with type 1 (IDDM) diabetes is referred to an ophthalmolo
gist for evaluation of developing cataracts. Pre appointment blood work was
requested and the results are shown below:
Fasting blood glucose 180 mg/dL
Hemoglobin A 15 gm/dL
Hemoglobin Alc 10% of total Hb
Urine ketones Positive
Urine glucose Positive
25
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
7. Which of the following enzymes is most strongly associated with cataract
formation in this patient?
A. Galactokinase
MedicalGenetics B. Aldose reductase
C. Glucokinase
D. Galactose 1 P uridyl transferase
E. Aldolase B
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
8. Which of the following best indicates that the blood glucose in this patient
has been elevated over a period of weeks?
A. Presence of ketone bodies
B. Hyperglycemia
C. Lipemia
D. Elevated HbA1c
E. Lipoprotein lipase
9. Which of the following enzymes would be more active in this patient than
in a normal control subject?
A. Hormone sensitive lipase
B. Glucokinase
C. Fatty acid synthase
D. Glycogen synthase
E. Lipoprotein lipase
10. A 40 year old woman with a history of bleeding and pancytopenia now
presents with leg pain. She describes a deep, dull pain of increasing severity
that required pain medication. Computed tomography examination reveals
erosion and thinning of the femoral head. A bone marrow biopsy is per
formed to confirm a diagnosis of Gaucher disease. What material would be
found abnormally accumulating in the lysosomes of her cells?
A. Mucopolysaccharide
B. Ganglioside
C. Ceramide
D. Cerebroside
E. Sulfatide
25
CHAPTER 16 | LIPID MOBILIzATION AND CATABOLISM
11. An underweight 4 year old boy presents semicomatose in the emergency
room at 10 A.M. Plasma glucose, urea, and glutamine are abnormally low;
acetoacetate is elevated; and lactate is normal. He is admitted to the ICU,
where an increase in blood glucose was achieved by controlled infusion of
glucagon or alanine. Which metabolic pathway is most likely deficient in
this child?
A. Hepatic gluconeogenesis
B. Skeletal muscle glycogenolysis
C. Adipose tissue lipolysis
D. Skeletal muscle proteolysis
E. Hepatic glycogenolysis
12. After suffering injuries in a motor vehicle accident, a 7 year old boy
undergoes open reduction surgery to repair a compound fractured femur.
Post surgically, the boy undergoes severe hemorrhage and requires transfu
sion of 8 units of blood. Coagulation studies demonstrate the PT time to
be normal, but the PTT time is prolonged. Mixing the boy’s plasma with
normal plasma returns the PTT time to normal. The mode of inheritance
of this boy’s disease is most similar to which of the following inherited
enzyme deficiencies?
A. Adenosine deaminase deficiency
B. α Galactosidase A deficiency
C. Glucocerebrosidase deficiency
D. Hexosaminidase A deficiency
E. Dystrophia myotonica protein kinase deficiency
13. A 15 month old female infant is brought to the emergency room by her par
ents. The infant’s mother did not receive routine pre natal care, and limited
information is available regarding the infant’s pediatric care. The mother
does reveal that the infant “doesn’t seem like her other children” and has
always been very “fussy.”’ Physical examination reveals a distressed infant
who does not verbalize. Her abdomen is tender and enlargement of both
spleen and liver are present. Ophthalmoscopic examination fails to reveal
cherry red spots. After a brief hospital course, the infant dies and autopsy is
performed. Neural tissue shows parallel striations of electron dense material
within lysosomes. A defect in which of the following was most likely present
in this infant?
A. Golgi associated phosphate transfer to mannose
B. Degradation of ganglioside GM2
C. Degradation of glucocerebrosides
D. Degradation of sphingomyelin
E. Synthesis of gangliosides
25
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Items 14 17
MedicalGenetics
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences A
B
C
For each item listed below, select the appropriate location from the drawing
shown above.
14. Carnitine shuttle
15. F0F1 ATP synthase
16. HMG CoA lyase
17. Carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1
25
CHAPTER 16 | LIPID MOBILIzATION AND CATABOLISM
Answers
1. Answer: A. Cortisol stimulates transcription of the PEP carboxykinase gene
in the liver but not in adipose tissue.
2. Answer: D. Fasted MCAD patients typically present with nonketotic hypo
glycemia, lactic acidosis, and plasma dicarboxylates.
3. Answer: D. Upon entry into the playground, the child secretes epinephrine,
which results in adipose tissue triglyceride (TG) breakdown and entry of
fatty acids (FA) into muscle and liver for mitochondrial β oxidation. A
defect in the carnitine shuttle system in this patient would result in accu
mulation of TG (re synthesis from FA) in liver and muscle cytoplasm.
Deficiency of the bilirubin diglucuronide transporter (choice A) would
result in a liver problem but not the muscle problem that this child has,
since the liver processes bilirubin. One would also expect an increase in
conjugated bilirubin and clay colored stools if bilirubin diglucuronide was
not entering the bile canaliculi.
Glucose 6 phosphatase deficiency (choice B) would account for the hepato
megaly and fatty liver, but not for the muscle weakness. These individuals are
also prone to lactic acidosis, which would lower the blood pH.
Mitochondrial 3 hydroxy 3 methylglutaryl CoA (HMG CoA) synthase
deficiency (choice C) would present somewhat similarly to a β oxidation
deficiency. Prolonged fasting hypoglycemia would provoke release of fatty
acids into the blood and their use by tissues such as the muscle and liver. The
deficiency of the mitochondrial HMG Co synthase prevents ketone forma
tion. There would be no muscle weakness because the muscle can use fatty
acids. The brain is unable to do so, and the presence of hypoketotic hypogly
cemia would deprive the brain of sufficient energy. Coma and death may
result.
Vitamin D deficiency (choice E) would not have an effect on organ enlarge
ment and blood glucose levels.
4. Answer: C. Glycogen depleted around 18 hours, gluconeogenesis from pro
tein begins to drop gradually, and by 2 weeks, ketones have become the
more important fuel for the brain.
5. Answer: B. Glycogen would not be mobilized from the liver.
6. Answer: A. Gluconeogenesis from proteins would be severely restricted
without this enzyme.
7. Answer: B. Aldose reductase is rich in lens and nerve tissue (among others)
and converts glucose to sorbitol, which causes the osmotic damage. In
galactosemia, this same enzyme converts galactose to galactitol, also creat
ing cataracts.
25
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
8. Answer: D. HbA1c is glycosylated HbA and is produced slowly whenever
the glucose in blood is elevated. It persists until the RBC is destroyed and
the Hb degraded and so is useful as a long term indicator of glucose level.
MedicalGenetics 9. Answer: A. Because the diabetes is not being well controlled, assume the
response to insulin is low and the man would have overstimulated glucagon
pathways.
10. Answer: D. Glucocerebrosides would accumulate in the cells because the
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences missing enzyme is glucocerebrosidase.
11. Answer: D. The patient is hypoglycemic because of deficient release of glu
coneogenic amino acid precursors from muscle (low urea and glutamine,
alanine and glucagon challenge tests). These results plus normal lactate and
hyperketonemia eliminate deficiencies in glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis,
and lipolysis as possibilities; defective muscle glycogenolysis would not pro
duce hypoglycemia.
12. Answer: B. The excessive bleeding, increased PTT, and correction of the
PTT with addition of normal serum point to hemophilia. The most com
mon types of hemophilia are hemophilia A (deficiency in clotting factor
VIII) and hemophilia B (Christmas disease; caused by a deficiency in clot
ting factor IX). The genes encoding both of these proteins are carried on
the X chromosome, making these X linked recessive diseases. The only dis
ease listed above which is inherited in an X linked manner is Fabry disease,
caused by a defect in α galactosidase A involved with degradation of glyco
sphingolipids.
(Choices C and D) are autosomal recessive inherited disorders of sphingo
lipid catabolism (Gaucher and Tay Sachs respectively) classified as lysosomal
storage diseases.
(Choice E) is an autosomal dominant inherited disorder (myotonic dystro
phy) which displays trinucleotide repeat expansion and anticipation.
13. Answer: D. Niemann Pick (Type A) disease is characterized by hepato
splenomegaly, with or without cherry red spots in the macular region,
neurologic involvement (intellectual disability, failure to crawl, sit, or walk
independently).
I cell disease (Choice A) is caused by a defect in Golgi associated phos
photransferase (N Acetylglucosamine 1 phosphotransferase), which would
usually present with cardiomegaly and would not show the Zebra body inclu
sions typical of Niemann Pick.
Tay Sachs disease (Choice B) is caused by a defect in hexosaminidase A. In
most cases, this will present with the cherry red spots and would not have
Zebra body inclusions inside lysosomes. No hepatosplenomegaly occurs.
(Choice C) describes Gaucher’s disease, caused by a defect in glucocerebro
sidase and would lead to “crumpled paper inclusions” inside macrophages.
The features include bone pain, fractures, and infarctions along with hepato
splenomegaly. Most cases are Type 1 and don’t present until late childhood or
adolescence.
25
CHAPTER 16 | LIPID MOBILIzATION AND CATABOLISM
(Choice E) is a distractor. There are no relevant diseases on Step 1 associated
with ganglioside synthesis.
Note: The patient in this case did not have “cherry red spots” in the macula
of the eye. Both Tay Sachs and Niemann Pick disease may present with
cherry red spots, but they are not specific to either disease. Similarly, their
absence cannot be used to exclude either disease.
14. Answer: A. Needed for transport of fatty acids across the mitochondrial
inner membrane.
15. Answer: A. Mitochondrial inner membrane.
16. Answer: B. Mitochondrial matrix (ketogenesis).
17. Answer: C. CAT 1 (CPT 1) and fatty acyl synthetase are among the few
enzymes associated with the outer mitochondrial membrane.
25

17 #
Amino Acid Metabolism
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Explain information related to removal and excretion of amino groups
❏ Answer questions about urea cycle and urea cycle defects
❏ Answer questions about disorders of amino acid metabolism
❏ Explain information related to propionyl CoA carboxylase and methyl
malonyl CoA
❏ Use knowledge of S adenosylmethionine, folate, and cobalamin
❏ Explain information related to specialized products derived from
amino acids
❏ Solve problems concerning heme synthesis
❏ Use knowledge of iron transport and storage
❏ Use knowledge of bilirubin metabolism
OVERVIEW
Protein obtained from the diet or from body protein during prolonged fasting or
starvation may be used as an energy source. Body protein is catabolized primarily in
muscle and in liver. Amino acids released from proteins usually lose their amino
group through transamination or deamination. The carbon skeletons can be convert
ed in the liver to glucose (glucogenic amino acids), acetyl CoA, and ketone bodies
(ketogenic), or in a few cases both may be produced (glucogenic and ketogenic).
REMOVAL AND EXCRETION OF AMINO GROUPS
Excess nitrogen is eliminated from the body in the urine. The kidney adds small
quantities of ammonium ion to the urine in part to regulate acid base balance, but
nitrogen is also eliminated in this process. Most excess nitrogen is converted to urea
in the liver and goes through the blood to the kidney, where it is eliminated in urine.
Amino groups released by deamination reactions form ammonium ion (NH4 +), BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
which must not escape into the peripheral blood. An elevated concentration of
Lactulose is metabolized to lactic acid in
ammonium ion in the blood, hyperammonemia, has toxic effects in the brain
(cerebral edema, convulsions, coma, and death). Most tissues add excess nitrogen the GI tract by bacteria, which in turn covert
to the blood as glutamine by attaching ammonia to the γ carboxyl group of ammonia (NH3) to ammonium (NH4 +),
glutamate. Muscle sends nitrogen to the liver as alanine and smaller quantities of
interfering with absorption and treating
other amino acids, in addition to glutamine. The figure below summarizes the flow
hyperammonemia.
of nitrogen from tissues to the liver or kidney for excretion.
25
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
MedicalGenetics
MUSCLE
α Keto
acids Amino acids
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Aminotransferases
B6
Glutamate α Ketoglutarate
B6
Alanine
Aminotransferase
α Keto
Pyruvate Alanine Alanine Alanine Pyruvate acids Amino acids
Alanine
aminotran Aminotransferases
sferase B6 B6
α Ketoglutarate Glutamate α Ketoglutarate
NAD B6
INTESTINE Aspartate
aminotransferase
Intestinal Glutamate
Glutamate bacteria dehydrogenase
Oxaloacetate
Glutaminase Aspartate
NH3 NH3 NH3
Proteolysis
Portal
of dietary Glutamine UREA
Blood
protein CYCLE
Urea
Glutamine LIVER
BLOOD Urea
MOST KIDNEY
TISSUES
Glutamine Glutamine Glutamine Urea Urea
Glutamine
NH3 synthetase Glutaminase NH3 NH4+ NH4+
Deamin Glutamate H+
Glutamate
ations
URINE
Figure I 17 1. Amino Group Removal for Elimination as Urea and Ammonia
Figure I 17 1. Amino Group Removal for Elimination as Urea and Ammonia
26
CHAPTER 17 | AMINO ACID METABOLISM
Glutamine Synthetase
Most tissues, including muscle, have glutamine synthetase, which captures excess
nitrogen by aminating glutamate to form glutamine. The reaction is irreversible.
Glutamine, a relatively nontoxic substance, is the major carrier of excess nitrogen
from tissues.
Glutaminase
The kidney contains glutaminase, allowing it to deaminate glutamine arriving in
the blood and to eliminate the amino group as ammonium ion in urine. The
reaction is irreversible. Kidney glutaminase is induced by chronic acidosis, in
which excretion of ammonium may become the major defense mechanism. The
liver has only small quantities of glutaminase; however, levels of the enzyme are
HY HY
high in the intestine where the ammonium ion from deamination can be sent
directly to the liver via the portal blood and used for urea synthesis. The intesMtinYal MY
bacteria and glutamine from dietary protein contribute to the intestinal ammonia
entering the portal blood. LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Aminotransferases (Transaminases)
Both muscle and liver have aminotransferases, which, unlike deMamEDinIaUseMs, YIELdDo not MEDIUM YIELD
release the amino groups as free ammonium ion. This class of enzymes transfers
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
the amino group from one carbon skeleton (an amino acid) to another (usually
α ketoglutarate, a citric acid cycle intermediate). Pyridoxal phosphate (PLP)
derived from vitamin B6 is required to mediate the transfer.
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
Aminotransferases are named according to the amino acid donating the amino
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
group to α ketoglutarate. Two important examples are alanine aminotransferase
(ALT, formerly GPT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST, formerly GOT).
Although the aminotransferases are in liver and muscle, in pathologic conditions
these enzymes may leak into the blood, where they are useful clinical indicators of
damage to liver or muscle.
The reactions catalyzed by aminotransferases are reversible and play several
roles in metabolism:
• During protein catabolism in muscle, they move the amino groups from
many of the different amino acids onto glutamate, thus pooling it for
transport. A portion of the glutamate may be aminated by glutamine
synthetase (as in other tissues) or may transfer the amino group to
pyruvate, forming alanine using the aminotransferase ALT.
• In liver, aminotransferases ALT and AST can move the amino group from
alanine arriving from muscle into aspartate, a direct donor of nitrogen
into the urea cycle.
Glutamate Dehydrogenase
This enzyme is found in many tissues, where it catalyzes the reversible oxidative
deamination of the amino acid glutamate. It produces the citric acid cycle interme
diate α ketoglutarate, which serves as an entry point to the cycle for a group of
glucogenic amino acids. Its role in urea synthesis and nitrogen removal is still
controversial.
26
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
UREA CYCLE
Urea, which contains 2 nitrogens, is synthesized in the liver from aspartate and
carbamoyl phosphate, which in turn is produced from ammonium ion and carbon
dioxide by mitochondrial carbamoyl phosphate synthetase. This enzyme requires
MedicalGenetics
N acetylglutamate as an activator. N acetylglutamate is produced only when free
amino acids are present.
Hepatocyte
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Mitochondrial NH4+ + HCO3 – + 2 ATP
matrix
Carbamoyl + N acetylglutamate
phosphate
synthetase I
Carbamoyl phosphate
Ornithine
transcarbamoylase
Ornithine
Citrulline
Cytoplasm
Citrulline
Ornithine
Argininosuccinate Aspartate
synthetase ATP
AMP + PPi
Argininosuccinate
Argininosuccinate
lyase
Fumarate
Arginase
Arginine
Urea
Figure I 17 2. The Urea Cycle in the Liver
Figure I 17 2. The Urea Cycle in the Liver
The urea cycle, like the citric acid cycle, acts catalytically. Small quantities of the
intermediates are sufficient to synthesize large amounts of urea from aspartate
and carbamoyl phosphate. The cycle occurs partially in the mitochondria and
partially in the cytoplasm.
• Citrulline enters the cytoplasm, and ornithine returns to the
mitochondria.
• Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase and ornithine transcarbamoylase are
mitochondrial enzymes.
26
CHAPTER 17 | AMINO ACID METABOLISM
• Aspartate enters the cycle in the cytoplasm and leaves the cycle (minus its
amino group) as fumarate. If gluconeogenesis is active, fumarate cHanY be HY
converted to glucose.
MY MY
• The product urea is formed in the cytoplasm and enters the blood for
delivery to the kidney. LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Genetic Deficiencies of the Urea Cycle
A combination of hyperammonemia, elevated blood glutamine, MEDaInUdM decreasYedIELD MEDIUM YIELD
blood urea nitrogen (BUN) suggests a defect in the urea cycle. With neonatal
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
onset, infants typically appear normal for the first 24 hours. Sometime during the
24 to 72 hour postnatal period, symptoms of lethargy, vomiting, and
hyperventilation begin and, if not treated, progress to coma, respiratory failure,
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
and death.
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
There are 2 deficiencies of the 2 mitochondrial enzymes in the urea cycle: carbam
oyl phosphate synthetase and ornithine transcarbamoylase. They can be distin
guished by an increase in orotic acid and uracil, which occurs in ornithine
transcarbamoylase deficiency, but not in the deficiency of carbamoyl phosphate
synthetase. Orotic acid and uracil are intermediates in pyrimidine synthesis (see
Chapter 18). This pathway is stimulated by the accumulation of carbamoyl
phosphate, the substrate for ornithine transcarbamoylase in the urea cycle and for
aspartate transcarbamoylase in pyrimidine synthesis.
Table I 17 1. Genetic Deficiencies of Urea Synthesis
Carbamoyl Phosphate Synthetase Ornithine Transcarbamoylase
↑ [NH4 +]; hyperammonemia ↑ [NH4 +]; hyperammonemia
Blood glutamine is increased Blood glutamine is increased
BUN is decreased BUN is decreased
No orotic aciduria Orotic aciduria
Autosomal recessive X linked recessive
Cerebral edema Cerebral edema
Lethargy, convulsions, coma, death Lethargy, convulsions, coma,
death
These conditions can be treated with a low protein diet and administration of
sodium benzoate or phenylpyruvate to provide an alternative route for capturing
and excreting excess nitrogen.
DISORDERS OF AMINO ACID METABOLISM
The figure below presents a diagram of pathways in which selected amino acids are
converted to citric acid cycle intermediates (and glucose) or to acetyl CoA (and
ketones). Important genetic deficiencies are identified.
26
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
MedicalGenetics Valine
Phenylketonuria
Phenylalanine isoleucine
• Intellectual disability Leucine
Phenylalanine • Musty odor
hydroxylase • Diet low in phe
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Tetrahydrobiopterin • Avoid aspartame Branched chain
• Diet important
ketoacid
during pregnancy
Tyrosine dehydrogenase
• Microcephaly
Maple syrup urine
Acetyl CoA
disease
• Urine has odor of
maple syrup
Homogentisic Acid Alkaptonuria OAA Citrate
• Intellectual disability
• Dark urine
• Abnormal muscle tone
Homogentisate • Ochronosis
Malate • Ketosis
oxidase • Arthritis
• Coma, death
α KG
Maleylacetoacetate
Fumarate
Succinyl CoA
Methylmalonyl CoA
mutase
Methylmalonic B12
aciduria
Methylmalonate Methylmalonyl CoA
Propionyl CoA
carboxylase (biotin)
Odd Carbon Fatty Acids Propionyl CoA
Threonine α Ketobutyrate
Cysteine
Cystathionine
Homocystinuria
Homocysteine
B6 Cystathionine • Deep vein thrombosis
methyl transferase
synthase • Stroke
N5 methyl THF
• Atherosclerosis
B12 Homocysteine • Marfan like habitus
• Intellectual disability
• Joint contractures
S adenosylhomocysteine
From diet Methionine
Methyl groups for biosynthesis
• Epinephrine
ATP
• N methylguanine cap on mRNA
S adenosylmethionine
Pi + PPi
Figure I 17 3. Genetic Deficiencies of Amino Acid Metabolism
Figure I 17 3. Genetic Deficiencies of Amino Acid Metabolism
26
MY MY
LY CHAPTER 17 | AMINLYO ACID METABOLISM
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Deficiency
(Phenylketonuria) MEDIUM YIELD MEDIUM YIELD
NOTE
Infants with classic phenylketonuria (PKU) are normal at birth but if untreated
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
show slow development, severe intellectual disability, autistic symptoms, and loss Aspartame (N aspartylphenylala nine methyl
of motor control. Children may have pale skin and white blonde hair. The
ester), a widely used artificial sweetener,
neurotoxic effects relate to high levels of phenylalanine and not FUtoNDAthMeENTpAhLeSnylk FUNDAMENTALS
must be strictly avoided by
etones from which the name of the disease derives. Infants are routinely screened a
few days after birth for blood phenylalanine level. Treatment is aRElIiNfeFloOnRgCEMENsTemisyn phenylketonRuEriIcNs.FORCEMENT
thetic diet restricted in phenylalanine (small quantities are necessary because it is
an essential amino acid).
Women with PKU who become pregnant must be especially careful about the
BRIDGE TO MEDICAL GENETICS
phenylalanine level in their blood so as not to adversely affect neurologic
HY HY
development in the fetus. Infants whose phenylketonuric mothers have not There are >100 known mutations in the
maintained adequate metabolic control during pregnancy have a high risk fMorY gene for phenylalanine MY hydroxylase, causing
intellectual disability (although less profound than in a child with untreated PKU),
PKU. This is an example of allelic
microcephaly, and low birth weight. LY LY
heterogeneity.
High YieldHY HIGH YIELDHY
Albinism
Albinism (1:15,000) is a group of conditions in which then normaMlEDIUMconversioYnIELMDY of MEDIUM YIELMDY
tyrosine to melanin is altered. The most severe form is a deficiency of tyrosinase,
LOW YIELDLY LOW YIELDLY
causing an absence of pigment in the skin, hair, and eyes.
FUNDHAigMhENTAYLieSld FUNHDIGAHMENTAYLIELD
Homogentisate Oxidase Deficiency
(Alkaptonuria) MEDREIUINMFORCEMEYNITELD MERDEIIUNMFORCEMEYNITELD
Accumulation of homogentisic acid in the blood causes its excretion in urine, after
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
which it gradually darkens upon exposure to air. This sign of alkaptonuria HY is not HY
present in all patients with the enzyme deficiency. The dark pigment also accumu
lates over years in the cartilage (ochronosis) and may be seen inFUNthDeAMEscNleTrAaLS oMfYthe FUNDAMENTALS MY
eye, in ear cartilage and patients develop arthritis in adulthood, usually beginning
in the third decade. Treatment is targeted to managing the symptoms.REINFORCEMENT LY REINFORCEMENT LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Branched Chain Ketoacid Dehydrogenase
Deficiency (Maple Syrup Urine Disease) MEDIUM YIELD MEDIUM YIELD
Branched chain ketoacid dehydrogenase, an enzyme similar to α ketoglutarate
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
dehydrogenase (thiamine, lipoic acid, CoA, FAD, NAD+), metabolizes branched
chain ketoacids produced from their cognate amino acids, valine, leucine, and
isoleucine. In the classic form of the disease, infants are normal FUfoNrDAMthEeNTALfiSrst HY few FUNDAMENTALS HY
days of life, after which they become progressively lethargic, lose weight, and have
alternating episodes of hypertonia and hypotonia, and the urine RdEeIvNeFloOpRsCEMENTaMY REINFORCEMENT MY
characteristic odor of maple syrup. Ketosis, coma, and death ensue if not treated.
Treatment requires restricting dietary valine, leucine, and isoleucine. LY NOTE LY
• Propionyl CoA carboxylase deficiency
High Yield invHolIvGesH YanIELDaccumulation of propionic
Propionyl CoA Carboxylase and
acid, methyl citrate, and
Methylmalonyl CoA Mutase Deficiencies MEDIUM YIELD MEDIUM YIELD
hydroxypropionic acid.
Valine, methionine, isoleucine, and threonine are all metabolized through the
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
• Methylmalonyl CoA mutase deficiency
propionic acid pathway (also used for odd carbon fatty acids). Deficiency of either
enzyme results in neonatal ketoacidosis from failure to metabolize ketoacids involves an accumulation of
produced from these 4 amino acids. The deficiencies may be distinguFiUshNedDAMENTALSbased on FmUeNthDylAmMalEonNiTcALS acid.
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
265
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
whether methylmalonic aciduria is present (methylmalonyl CoA mutase deficiency)
or by the presence of methyl citrate and hydroxypropionate (propionyl CoA carbox
ylase deficiency). A diet low in protein or a semisynthetic diet with low amounts of
valine, methionine, isoleucine, and threonine is used to treat both deficiencies.
MedicalGenetics
HOMOCYSTEINEMIA/HOMOCYSTINURIA
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Accumulation of homocysteine in blood is associated with cardiovascular
disease; deep vein thrombosis, thromboembolism, and stroke; dislocation of
the lens (ectopic lens); and intellectual disability. Homocysteine is a disulfide
dimer of homocysteine. Homocysteinemia caused by an enzyme deficiency
is a rare, but severe, condition in which atherosclerosis in childhood is a
prominent finding. These children often have myocardial infarctions before
20 years of age. All patients excrete high levels of homocysteine in the urine.
Treatment includes a diet low in methionine. The major enzyme deficiency
producing homocysteinemia is that of cystathionine synthase:
A 5 year old girl was brought to her pediatrician because she had difficulty
with her vision and seemed to be slow in her mental and physical
development since birth. The physician noted that the girl had abnormally
long, “spidery” fingers and a downward dislocation of the right lens of her
eye. Further examination revealed a deep vein thrombosis. A laboratory
examination of her blood indicated increased methionine. She also had
increased urinary excretion of homocysteine indicated by a cyanide
nitroprusside test. The parents were advised to restrict methionine to low
levels and supplement folate, vitamin B12, and vitamin B6 in the girl’s diet.
Homocystinuria caused by a genetic defect in the enzyme cystathionine
synthase is rare and can present similarly to Marfan syndrome. The latter
is a defect in the fibrillin gene, resulting in tall stature, long fingers and
toes, lens dislocation, and a tendency toward aortic wall ruptures. In
cystathionine synthase deficiency subluxation of the lens is downward and
inward. In Marfan syndrome subluxation of the lens is upward and outward.
Cystathionine synthase deficiency results in the accumulation of homocysteine
and methionine and their spillage into blood and urine. Two molecules of
homocysteine can oxidize to the disulfide crosslinked homocysteine. Many
patients with homocystinuria who have partial activity of cystathionine HY
synthase respond well to pyridoxine administration. If left untreated, patients
MY
will usually succumb to myocardial infarction, stroke, or pulmonary embolism.
LY
High Yield H
Homocysteinemia from Vitamin Deficiencies
Vitamin deficiencies may produce a more mild form of homocyMsteEiDneImUMia. YIELD Mild ME
homocysteinemia is associated with increased risk for atherosclerosis, deep vein
LOW YIELD
thrombosis, and stroke. The vitamin deficiencies causing homocysteinemia include:
• Folate deficiency: recommended dietary intake of folate has been increased
(also protects against neural tube defects in the fetus), anFdUNDAadMdiEtiNonTaAlLS folate FUN
is now added to flour (bread, pasta, and other products made from flour)
REINFORCEMENT R
• Vitamin B12
• Vitamin B6
266
CHAPTER 17 | AMINO ACID METABOLISM
Recall Question
Which of the following results from a deficiency of ornithine
transcarbamoylase but not of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase?
A. Cerebral edema
B. Decreased BUN
C. Hyperammonemia
D. Increased blood glutamine
E. Orotic aciduria
Answer: E
S ADENOSYLMETHIONINE, FOLATE, AND COBALAMIN NOTE
THB (BH4) is necessary for tyrosine
One Carbon Units in Biochemical Reactions hydroxylase, phenylalanine hydroxylase, and
One carbon units in different oxidation states are required in the pathways tryptophan hydroxylase (serotonin synthesis)
producing purines, thymidine, and many other compounds. When a biochemical and is regenerated by dihydropteridine
reaction requires a methyl group (methylation), S adenosylmethionine (SAM) is reductase.
generally the methyl donor.
If a 1 carbon unit in another oxidation state is required (methylene, methenyl,
formyl), tetrahydrofolate (THF) typically serves as its donor.
S Adenosylmethionine
Important pathways requiring SAM include synthesis of epinephrine and HoYf the HY
7 methylguanine cap on eukaryotic mRNA. After donating the methyl group,
SAM is converted to homocysteine and remethylated in a reaction catalyzed MYby MY
N methyl THF–homocysteine methyltransferase requiring both vitamin B12 and
LY LY
N methyl THF. The methionine produced is once again used to make SAM.
CLINICAL CORRELATE
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Tetrahydrofolate
Parkinson’s disease is caused by loss of
THF is formed from the vitamin folate through 2 reductions inMvoElvDinIUgM NYAIDEPLHD dopamineMrgEiDcIUM neurYoInEsLD in the substantia
and catalyzed by dihydrofolate reductase. It picks up a 1 carbon unit from a variety
nigra. It is treated with levodopa (L dopa).
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
of donors and enters the active 1 carbon pool. Important pathways
requiring forms of THF from this pool include the synthesis of all purines and
thymidine, which in turn are used for DNA and RNA synthesis during cell growth
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTAL
and division.
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
Megaloblastic anemia results from insufficient active THF to support cell division
in the bone marrow. Methotrexate inhibits DHF reductase, making it a useful
antineoplastic drug. Folate deficiencies may be seen during pregnancy and in
alcoholism.
Additional folate may be stored as the highly reduced N5 methyl THF. This form
is referred to as the storage pool as there is only one known enzyme that uses it,
and in turn moves it back into the active pool. This enzyme is N methyl THF
homocysteine methyltransferase, which also requires vitamin B12 and is involved
in regenerating SAM as a methyl donor for reactions.
267
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
1 carbon
Dihydrofolate Dihydrofolate
unit
reductase reductase
added Active folate
Dihydrofolate Tetrahydrofolate • Formyl THF Purines
Folate
(DHF) (THF) • Methenyl THF thymidine
MedicalGenetics
• Methylene THF
Methionine
Homocysteine methyl transferase
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences B12 Reduced folate DNA and RNA
• Methyl THF cell division
HY
Homocysteine
MY
Figure I 17 5. Folate Metabolism
Figure I 17 4. Folate Metabolism LY
High Yield H
Cobalamin
The vitamin cobalamin (vitamin B12) is reduced and activated MEinDIUtMhe bodyYIELDto 2 ME
forms: adenosylcobalamin (used by methylmalonyl CoA mutase) and methylco
LOW YIELD
balamin (formed from N5 methyl THF in the N methyl THF homocysteine
methyltransferase reaction). These are the only 2 enzymes which use B12 (other
than the enzymes that reduce and add an adenosyl group to it).
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
Cobalamin deficiency can result in the following:
REINFORCEMENT RE
• Secondary deficiency of active THF, by preventing its release from the
storage pool through the N methyl THF homocysteine methyltransferase
reaction (thus also results in megaloblastic anemia)
• Progressive peripheral neuropathy
• Pernicious anemia (most likely reason), a failure to absorb vitamin B12 in
the absence of intrinsic factor from parietal cells
– B12 absorption also decreases with aging and in individuals with
chronic pancreatitis.
– B12 absorption can also decrease (less commonly) with a long term,
completely vegetarian diet (plants don’t contain B12) or infection with
Diphyllobothrium latum, a parasite found in raw fish (excess B12 is
stored in the body, so deficiencies develop slowly)
Treating a cobalamin deficiency with folate corrects the megaloblastic anemia but
does not halt the neuropathy.
26
CHAPTER 17 | AMINO ACID METABOLISM
Table I 17 2. Folate versus Vitamin B12 Deficiency BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY
Folate Deficiency Vitamin B12 (Cobalamin) Deficiency Vitamin B12 deficiency causes
demyelination of the posterior columns and
Megaloblastic anemia Megaloblastic anemia
lateral corticospinal tracts in the spinal
• Macrocytic • Macrocytic
cord
• MCV >100 femtoliters (fL) • MCV >100 femtoliters (fL)
• PMN nucleus more than 5 lobes • PMN nucleus more than 5 lobes
Homocysteinemia with risk for Homocysteinemia with risk for
cardiovascular disease cardiovascular disease
Methylmalonic aciduria
Progressive peripheral neuropathy
Deficiency develops in 3–4 months Deficiency develops in years
Risk factors for deficiency: Risk factors for deficiency:
• Pregnancy (neural tube • Pernicious anemia
defects in fetus may result)
• Gastric resection
• Alcoholism
• Chronic pancreatitis
• Severe malnutrition
• Severe malnutrition
• Gastric or terminal ileum
• Vegan
resection
• Infection with D. latum
• Aging
• Bacterial overgrowth of the
terminal ileum
• H. pylori infection
SPECIALIzED PRODUCTS DERIVED FROM AMINO ACIDS
Table I 17 3. Products of Amino Acids
Amino Acid Products
Tyrosine Thyroid hormones T3 and T4
Melanin
Catecholamines
Tryptophan Serotonin
NAD, NADP
Arginine Nitric oxide (NO)
Glutamate γ Aminobutyric acid (GABA)
Histidine Histamine
HEME SYNTHESIS
Heme synthesis occurs in almost all tissues because heme proteins include not
only hemoglobin and myoglobin but all the cytochromes (electron transport
chain, cytochrome P 450, cytochrome b5), as well as the enzymes catalase,
peroxidase, and the soluble guanylate cyclase stimulated by nitric oxide. The
pathway producing heme, as shown below, is controlled independently in different
tissues. In liver, the rate limiting enzyme δ aminolevulinate synthase (ALA) is
repressed by heme.
269
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Glycine + Succinyl CoA
Repressed by heme
ALA synthase
B6
MedicalGenetics
(mitochondria)
δ Aminolevulinic acid
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences ALA Inhibited by lead (Pb)
dehydratase
Porphobilinogen Acute intermittent porphyria
NOTE • Autosomal dominant, late
Porphobilinogen onset
Compounds with an “ ogen” suffix, such as
deaminase • Episodic, variable expression
urobilinogen, are colorless substances. In aka • Anxiety, confusion, paranoia
the presence of oxygen, they spontaneously hydroxymethylbilane • Acute abdominal pain
synthase • No photosensitivity
oxidize, forming a conjugated double bond
• Port wine urine in some
network in the compounds. These oxidized patients
Hydroxymethylbilane
compounds are highly colored substances • Never give barbiturates
and have an “ in” suffix (e.g., porphobilin, Uroporphyrinogen III
synthase
urobilin).
Porphyria cutanea tarda
Uroporphyrinogen III • Most common porphyria
• Autosomal dominant late
Uroporphyrinogen onset
decarboxylase • Photosensitivity
• Inflammation, blistering,
Coproporphyrinogen III
shearing of skin in areas
exposed to sunlight
• Hyperpigmentation
• Exacerbated by alcohol
• Red brown to deep red urine
Protoporphyrin IX
Fe2+ Inhibited by lead (Pb)
Ferrochelatase
(mitochondria)
HY
Heme
MY
Figure I 17 6. Heme Synthesis
Figure I 17 5. Heme Synthesis LY
High Yield H
Acute Intermittent Porphyria:
Porphobilinogen Deaminase (Hydroxymethylbilane SynthaMseE)DIUM YIELD ME
Deficiency
LOW YIELD
This late onset autosomal dominant disease exhibits variable expression. Many
heterozygotes remain symptom free throughout their lives. Signs and symp
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
toms, when present, include:
• Abdominal pain, often resulting in multiple laparoscopies REIN(FscOarRsCEMENoTn R
abdomen)
• Anxiety, paranoia, and depression
270
CHAPTER 17 | AMINO ACID METABOLISM
• Paralysis
• Motor, sensory or autonomic neuropathy
• Weakness
• Excretion of ALA (δ aminolevulinic) and PBG (porphobilinogen) during
episodes
• In severe cases, dark port wine color to urine on standing HY HY
Some of these individuals are incorrectly diagnosed and placed in psychiatric MY MY
institutions. Episodes may be induced by hormonal changes and by many drugs,
including barbiturates. LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Other Porphyrias
Deficiencies of other enzymes in the heme pathway produce porMphEyDriIaUsM YinIELDwhich MEDIUM YIELD
photosensitivity is a common finding. Chronic inflammation to overt blistering
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
and shearing in exposed areas of the skin characterize these porphyrias. The most
common is porphyria cutanea tarda (deficiency of uroporphyrinogen decarboxyl
ase), an autosomal dominant condition with late onset. β Carotene is often
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
administered to porphyria patients with photosensitivity to reduce the production
of reactive oxygen species. REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
PORPHYRIA CUTANEA TARDA
A 35 year old man was becoming very sensitive to sunlight and often
detected persistent rashes and blisters throughout areas of his body
that were exposed to the sun. He also observed that drinking excessive
alcohol with his friends after softball games worsened the incidence of the
recurrent blisters and sunburns. He became even more concerned after he
noticed his urine became a red brown tint if he did not flush the toilet.
Porphyria cutanea tarda is an adult onset hepatic porphyria in which
hepatocytes are unable to decarboxylate uroporphyrinogen in heme
synthesis. The uroporphyrin spills out of the liver and eventually into urine,
giving rise to the characteristic red wine urine if it is allowed to stand, a
hallmark of porphyrias. Hepatotoxic substances, such as excessive alcohol
HY HY
or iron deposits, can exacerbate the disease. Skin lesions are related to high
circulating levels of porphyrins. MY BRIDGE TO PHARMACMOYLOGY
LY Barbiturates are hydroxylatLeYd by the
microsomal cytochrome P 450 system in the
liver to facilitate their efficient elimination
Vitamin B6 Deficiency
High YieldHY HIGH YIELDHY
from the body. Administration of the
ALA synthase, the rate limiting enzyme, requires pyridoxine (vMitaEmDiInUM B6Y).IELMDY barbituraMtesEDIUM resultsYIELMDiYn stimulation of
Deficiency of pyridoxine is associated with isoniazid therapy for tuberculosis and
cytochrome P 450 synthesis, which in turn
may cause sideroblastic anemia with ringed sideroblasts. LOW YIELDLY LOW YIELDLY
reduces heme levels. The reduction in heme
lessens the repression of ALA synthase,
Iron Deficiency FUNDHAigMhENTAYLieSld causing FUNHDImGA oHr M e ENTA pYo LIrES pLhDyrin precursor synthesis.
In porphyrias, the indirect production of
The last enzyme in the pathway, heme synthase (ferrochelatase), MEDRiEInUItNrMoFdOucReCsEMEYNITELDthe MERDEIIUNMFORCEMEYNITELD
Fe2+ into the heme ring. Deficiency of iron produces a microcytic hypochromic more precursors by the barbiturates
anemia. LOW YIELD exacerbates LOthWe disYeaIsEeL.D
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
27
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
Immunology
MY
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY LY
Biochemistry
High Yield H
Lead Poisoning
Lead inactivates many enzymes including ALA dehydrase MEaDndIUM ferrochYelIaEtaLsDe ME
(heme synthase), and can produce a microcytic sideroblastic anemia with
LOW YIELD
ringed sideroblasts in the bone marrow. Other symptoms include:
MedicalGenetics
• Coarse basophilic stippling of erythrocytes
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
• Headache, nausea, memory loss
• Abdominal pain, diarrhea (lead colic) REINFORCEMENT RE
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
• Lead lines in gums
• Lead deposits in abdomen and epiphyses of bone seen on radiograph
• Neuropathy (claw hand, wrist drop)
• Increased urinary ALA
• Increased free erythrocyte protoporphyrin
CLINICAL CORRELATE Vitamin B6 deficiency, iron deficiency, and lead poisoning all can cause anemia.
The failure of ferrochelatase to insert Fe2+
into protoporphyrin IX to form heme, such as Table I 17 4. Vitamin B6 Deficiency, Iron Deficiency, and Lead Poisoning
in lead poisoning or iron deficiency anemia,
Vitamin B6
results in the nonenzymatic insertion of
(Pyridoxine)
Zn2+ to form zinc protoporphyrin. This
Deficiency Iron Deficiency Lead Poisoning
complex is extremely fluorescent and is
Microcytic Microcytic Microcytic
easily detected.
Coarse basophilic
stippling in erythrocyte
NOTE Ringed side Ringed sideroblasts in
roblasts in bone bone marrow
Anemia is an important topic on the exam.
marrow
Compare and contrast all anemias
Protoporphyrin: ↓ Protoporphyrin: ↑ Protoporphyrin: ↑
(differential diagnosis).
δ ALA: ↓ δ ALA: Normal δ ALA: ↑
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY Ferritin: ↑ Ferritin: ↓ Ferritin: ↑
Hemochromatosis is an inherited, autosomal
Serum iron: ↑ Serum iron: ↓ Serum iron: ↑
recessive disease (prevalence 1/200)
Isoniazid for Dietary iron insufficient to Lead paint
generally seen in men age >40 and in older
tuberculosis compensate for normal
Pottery glaze
women. The disease is characterized by a
loss
daily intestinal absorption of 2–3 mg of iron Batteries
compared with the normal 1 mg. Over (Diagnose by measur
ing blood lead level)
20–30 years, the disease results in levels of
20–30 grams of iron in the body (normal 4
grams). Hemosiderin deposits are found in
the liver, pancreas, skin, and joints. IRON TRANSPORT AND STORAGE
Iron (Fe3+) released from hemoglobin in the histiocytes is bound to ferritin and
then transported in the blood by transferrin, which can deliver it to tissues for
synthesis of heme. Important proteins in this context are:
• Ferroxidase (also known as ceruloplasmin, a Cu2+ protein) oxidizes Fe2+
to Fe3+ for transport and storage.
• Transferrin carries Fe3+ in blood.
27
CHAPTER 17 | AMINO ACID METABOLISM
• Ferritin itself oxidizes Fe2+ to Fe3+ for storage of normal amounts of Fe3+
in tissues. Loss of iron from the body is accomplished by bleeding and
shedding epithelial cells of the mucosa and skin. The body has no mecha
nism for excreting iron, so controlling its absorption into the mucosal cells
is crucial. No other nutrient is regulated in this manner.
• Hemosiderin binds excess Fe3+ to prevent escape of free Fe3+ into the
blood, where it is toxic.
Dietary Fe3+
Vitamin C Ferritin (Fe3+)
Transferrin Ferritin (Fe3+)
Fe2+ Fe2+ Fe2+ Fe3+ Fe2+ Many enzymes
and
Mucosa
cytochromes
Most tissues
Bone
Transferrin RES cells
Erythropoiesis Fe2+
Hb RBC turnover
= Transferrin receptor
RBC
Figure I 17 7. Iron Metabolism
Figure I 17 6. Iron Metabolism
BILIRUBIN METABOLISM
Subsequent to lysis of older erythrocytes in the spleen, heme released from
hemoglobin is converted to bilirubin in the histiocytes.
• Bilirubin is not water soluble and is therefore transported in the blood
attached to serum albumin.
• Hepatocytes conjugate bilirubin with glucuronic acid, increasing its water
solubility.
• Conjugated bilirubin is secreted into the bile.
• Intestinal bacteria convert conjugated bilirubin into urobilinogen.
• A portion of the urobilinogen is further converted to bile pigments
(stercobilin) and excreted in the feces, producing their characteristic
red brown color. Bile duct obstruction results in clay colored stools.
• Some of the urobilinogen is converted to urobilin (yellow) and excreted in
urine.
27
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
CLINICAL CORRELATE Spleen
Heme
Excessive RBC destruction in hemolytic Hemolysis of older RBC releases
hemoglobin
anemia results in excessive conversion of
•Heme metabolized in histiocytes
MedicalGenebtiiclisrubin to urobilinogen in the intestine. Biliverdin •Production of biliverdin releases
Higher than normal absorption of the carbon monoxide (CO)
urobilinogen and its subsequent excretion in
Bilirubin
the urine results in a deeper colored urine.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Albumin Blood
Conditions that increase indirect
bilirubin
•Hemolysis
Bilirubin albumin
•Crigler Najjar syndromes
•Gilbert syndrome
Liver •Low levels of conjugation
enzymes in newborn
Bilirubin
CLINICAL CORRELATE •Hepatic damage
At very high levels, lipid soluble bilirubin may UDP Glucuronate
cross the blood brain barrier and precipitate UDP glucuronyl
in the basal ganglia, causing irreversible transferase
brain damage (kernicterus). Bilirubin diglucuronide
Intestine
Conditions that increase direct
bilirubin
Urobilinogen
•Hepatic damage
Bile pigments (stercobilin)
•Bile duct obstruction (clay colored
stools)
•Dubin Johnson (black
pigmentation in liver)
Feces
•Rotor syndrome
Figure I 17 8. Heme Catabolism and Bilirubin
Figure I 17 7. Heme Catabolism and Bilirubin
Recall Question
Which substance is the human body unable to excrete?
A. Biotin
B. Cobalamine
C. Iron
D. Niacin
Answer: C
27
MY MY
LY CHAPTER 17 | AMINLYO ACID METABOLISM
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Bilirubin and Jaundice
Jaundice (yellow color of skin, whites of the eyes) may occur whenMEDIUbMlood YleIvEeLlsD of MEDIUM YIELD
bilirubin exceed normal (icterus). It may be characterized by an increase in uncon
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
jugated (indirect) bilirubin, conjugated (direct) bilirubin, or both. Accumulation of
bilirubin (usually unconjugated) in the brain (kernicterus) may result in death.
When conjugated bilirubin increases, it may be excreted, giving FUaNDdAeMepENTALyeSllow red FUNDAMENTALS
color to the urine.
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
Examples of conditions associated with increased bilirubin and jaundice include
hemolytic crisis, UDP glucuronyl transferase deficiency, hepatic damage, and bile
duct occlusion.
Hemolytic crisis
With severe hemolysis, more bilirubin is released into the blood than can be
transported on albumin and conjugated in the liver. Unconjugated and total
bilirubin increase and may produce jaundice and kernicterus. Examples include:
• Episode of hemolysis in G6PDH deficiency
• Sickle cell crisis
• Rh disease of newborn
Hemolytic crisis may be confirmed by low hemoglobin and elevated reticulocyte
counts.
UDP glucuronyl transferase deficiency
When bilirubin conjugation is low because of genetic or functional deficiency of
the glucuronyl transferase system, unconjugated and total bilirubin increase.
Examples include:
• Crigler Najjar syndromes (types I and II)
• Gilbert syndrome
• Physiologic jaundice in the newborn, especially premature infants
(enzymes may not be fully induced)
Hepatic damage
Viral hepatitis or cirrhosis produces an increase in both direct and indirect
bilirubin. Aminotransferase levels will also be elevated.
• Alcoholic liver disease, AST increases more than ALT
• Viral hepatitis, ALT increases more than AST
Bile duct occlusion
Occlusion of the bile duct (gallstone, primary biliary cirrhosis, pancreatic cancer)
prevents conjugated bilirubin from leaving the liver. Conjugated bilirubin increas
es in blood and may also appear in urine. Feces are light colored.
27
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Review Questions
Select the ONE best answer.
1. Which enzymes are responsible for producing the direct donors of nitrogen
MedicalGenetics
into the pathway producing urea?
A. Arginase and argininosuccinate lyase
B. Xanthine oxidase and guanine deaminase
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
C. Glutamate dehydrogenase and glutaminase
D. Argininosuccinate synthetase and ornithine transcarbamoylase
E. Aspartate aminotransferase and carbamoyl phosphate synthetase
2. Two days after a full term normal delivery, a neonate begins to hyperventi
late, develops hypothermia and cerebral edema, and becomes comatose.
Urinalysis reveals high levels of glutamine and orotic acid. BUN is below
normal. Which enzyme is most likely to be deficient in this child?
A. Cytoplasmic glutaminase
B. Cytoplasmic carbamoyl phosphate synthetase
C. Cytoplasmic orotidylate decarboxylase
D. Mitochondrial carbamoyl phosphate synthetase
E. Mitochondrial ornithine transcarbamoylase
Items 3 and 4
A 49 year old man with a rare recessive condition is at high risk for deep vein
thrombosis and stroke and has had replacement of ectopic lenses. He has a
normal hematocrit and no evidence of megaloblastic anemia.
3. A mutation in the gene encoding which of the following is most likely to
cause this disease?
A. Cystathionine synthase
B. Homocysteine methyltransferase
C. Fibrillin
D. Lysyl oxidase
E. Branched chain α ketoacid dehydrogenase
4. Amino acid analysis of this patient’s plasma would most likely reveal an
abnormally elevated level of
A. lysine
B. leucine
C. methionine
D. ornithine
E. cysteine
27
CHAPTER 17 | AMINO ACID METABOLISM
5. A 56 year old man with a history of genetic disease undergoes hip replace
ment surgery for arthritis. During the operation the surgeon notes a dark
pigmentation (ochronosis) in the cartilage. His ochronotic arthritis is most
likely caused by oxidation and polymerization of excess tissue
A. homogentisic acid
B. orotic acid
C. methylmalonic acid
D. uric acid
E. ascorbic acid
Items 6–8
Valine
C. Propionyl CoA
Isoleucine
F.
Methylmalonyl CoA
B.
Glutamate
G.
H.
Succinate
Isocitrate
Maleylacetoacetate
D.
Homogentisate
Malate
Acetyl CoA
Tyrosine
A.
E
Pyruvate
Phenylalanine
I.
Alanine
For each of the conditions below, link the missing substrate or enzyme.
6. A 9 week old boy, healthy at birth, begins to develop symptoms of ketoaci
dosis, vomiting, lethargy, seizures and hypertonia. Urine has characteristic
odor of maple syrup.
7. A child with white blond hair, blue eyes, and pale complexion is on a special
diet in which one of the essential amino acids is severely restricted. He has
been told to avoid foods artificially sweetened with aspartame.
8. A chronically ill patient on long term (home) parenteral nutrition develops
metabolic acidosis, a grayish pallor, scaly dermatitis, and alopecia (hair
loss). These symptoms subside upon addition of the B vitamin biotin to the
alimentation fluid.
277
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
9. A woman 7 months pregnant with her first child develops anemia.
Laboratory evaluation indicates an increased mean cell volume (MVC),
hypersegmented neutrophils, and altered morphology of several other cell
types. The most likely underlying cause of this woman’s anemia is
MedicalGenetics
A. folate deficiency
B. iron deficiency
C. glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
D. cyanocobalamin (B12) deficiency
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
E. lead poisoning
Items 10 and 11
A 64 year old woman is seen by a hematologist for evaluation of a macrocytic
anemia. The woman was severely malnourished. Both homocysteine and
methylmalonate were elevated in her blood and urine, and the transketolase level
in her erythrocytes was below normal.
10. What is the best evidence cited that the anemia is due to a primary defi
ciency of cyanocobalamin (B12)?
A. Macrocytic anemia
B. Elevated methylmalonate
C. Low transketolase activity
D. Elevated homocysteine
E. Severe malnutrition
11. In response to a B12 deficiency, which of the additional conditions may
develop in this patient if she is not treated?
A. Progressive peripheral neuropathy
B. Gout
C. Wernicke Korsakoff
D. Destruction of parietal cells
E. Bleeding gums and loose teeth
27
CHAPTER 17 | AMINO ACID METABOLISM
Items 12–15
B citrate C D
A E
G
malate F succinate
Link the following to the letters in the cycle.
Figure SQ XVII 3
12. Obligate activator of hepatic pyruvate carboxylase in the postabsorptive
state.
13. Product formed by argininosuccinate lyase during urea synthesis.
14. Substrate and energy source for synthesis of δ aminolevulinate in the heme
pathway.
15. Converted to glutamate in a reaction requiring the coenzyme form of pyri
doxine (B6)
16. A 62 year old man being treated for tuberculosis develops a microcytic,
hypochromic anemia. Ferritin levels are increased, and marked sideroblas
tosis is present. A decrease in which of the following enzyme activities is
most directly responsible for the anemia in this man?
A. Cytochrome oxidase
B. Cytochrome P450 oxidase
C. Pyruvate kinase
D. δ Aminolevulinate synthase
E. Lysyl oxidase
17. A 48 year old man developed abdominal colic, muscle pain, and fatigue.
Following a 3 week hospitalization, acute intermittent porphyria was ini
tially diagnosed based on a high level of urinary δ aminolevulinic acid.
Subsequent analysis of the patient’s circulating red blood cells revealed that
70% contained elevated levels of zinc protoporphyrin, and the diagnosis
was corrected. The correct diagnosis is most likely to be
A. protoporphyria
B. congenital erythropoietic porphyria
C. lead poisoning
D. barbiturate addiction
E. iron deficiency
27
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
18. A 3 week old infant has been having intermittent vomiting and convul
sions. She also has had episodes of screaming and hyperventilation. The
infant has been lethargic between episodes. Tests reveal an expanded abdo
men, and blood values show decreased citrulline amounts as well as a
MedicalGenetics decreased BUN. What other clinical outcomes would be expected in this
infant?
A. Decreased blood pH and uric acid crystals in urine
B. Decreased blood pH and increased lactic acid in blood
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
C. Increased blood glutamine and increased orotic acid in urine
D. Increased blood ammonia and increased urea in urine
E. Megaloblastic anemia and increased methylmalonic acid in blood
19. A 69 year old male presents to his family physician with a complaint of
recent onset difficulty in performing activities of daily living. He is a retired
factory worker who last worked 4 years ago. Upon questioning, his spouse
reveals that he “hasn’t been able to get around the way he used to.” Physical
examination reveals a well nourished 69 year old man who walks with an
exaggerated kyphosis. His gait appears to be quite slow and wide based. He
also appears to have a resting tremor. The appropriate management of his
case would target which of the following?
A. Amino acid degradation
B. Catecholamine synthesis
C. Ganglioside degradation
D. Prostaglandin synthesis
E. Sphingolipid degradation
28
CHAPTER 17 | AMINO ACID METABOLISM
Answers
1. Answer: E. Aspartate is produced by AST and carbamoyl phosphate by
CPS I.
2. Answer: E. Given these symptoms, the defect is in the urea cycle and the
elevated orotate suggests deficiency of ornithine transcarbamoylase.
3. Answer: A. Homocysteine, the substrate for the enzyme, accumulates
increasing the risk of deep vein thrombosis and disrupting the normal
crosslinking of fibrillin. Deficiency of homocysteine methyltransferase
would cause homocystinuria, but would also predispose to megaloblastic
anemia.
4. Answer: C. Only methionine is degraded via the homocysteine/
cystathionine pathway and would be elevated in the plasma of a
cystathionine synthase–deficient patient via activation of homocysteine
methyltransferase by excess substrate.
5. Answer: A. Adults with alkaptonuria show a high prevalence of ochronotic
arthritis due to deficiency of homogentisate oxidase.
6. Answer: C. The child has maple syrup urine disease; substrates are
branched chain α ketoacids derived from the branched chain amino acids.
7. Answer: E. The child has PKU; aspartame contains phenylalanine. These
children may be blond, blue eyed, and pale complected because of deficient
melanin production from tyrosine.
8. Answer: F. This is the only biotin dependent reaction in the diagram. The
enzyme is propionyl CoA carboxylase.
9. Answer: A. Pregnant woman with megaloblastic anemia and elevated
serum homocysteine strongly suggests folate deficiency. Iron deficiency
presents as microcytic, hypochromic anemia and would not elevate homo
cysteine. B12 deficiency is not most likely in this presentation.
10. Answer: B. Methylmalonyl CoA mutase requires B12 but not folate for
activity. Macrocytic anemia, elevated homocysteine, and macrocytic anemia
can be caused by B12 or folate deficiency.
11. Answer: A. Progressive peripheral neuropathy. A distractor may be D, but
this would be the cause of a B12 deficiency, not a result of it.
12. Answer: B. Acetyl CoA activates pyruvate carboxylase and gluconeogenesis
during fasting.
13. Answer: F. Fumarate.
14. Answer: E. Succinyl CoA.
15. Answer: D. Glutamate is produced by B6 dependent transamination of
α ketoglutarate.
16. Answer: D. Sideroblastic anemia in a person being treated for tubercu
losis (with isoniazid) is most likely due to vitamin B6 deficiency.
δ Aminolevulinate synthase, the first enzyme in heme synthesis,
requires vitamin B6 (pyridoxine).
28
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
17. Answer: C. Lead inhibits both ferrochelatase (increasing the zinc
protoporphyrin) and ALA dehydrase (increasing δ ALA).
18. Answer: C. The infant has a defect in the urea cycle, resulting from orni
MedicalGenetics thine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency. OTC deficiency would result in
decreased intermediates of the urea cycle, including decreased urea forma
tion as indicated by the decreased BUN. OTC can be diagnosed by elevated
orotic acid since carbamyl phosphate accumulates in the liver mitochondria
and spills into the cytoplasm entering the pyrimidine synthesis pathway.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Methylmalonic acid in blood (choice E) is seen in vitamin B12 disorders.
A decreased BUN would result in elevated ammonia in blood, raising
the pH (choices A and B).
Decreased BUN means decreased blood urea, hence, decreased urea in
urine (choice D).
19. Answer: B. The above case describes a patient with Parkinson’s disease,
which is caused by degeneration of the substantia nigra. This leads to dopa
mine deficiency in the brain and results in resting tremors, bradykinesia,
cog wheeling of the hand joints, and rigidity of musculature. In addition,
patients are often described as having “mask like facies.” Dopamine is one
of the catecholamines synthesized in a common pathway with norepineph
rine and epinephrine.
The diseases involving amino acid degradation (choice A), ganglioside
degradation (choice C), and sphingolipid degradation (choice E) do not
match the presentation seen in the case.
28
18 #
Purine and Pyrimidine Metabolism
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Explain information related to pyrimidine synthesis
❏ Explain information related to purine synthesis
❏ Demonstrate understanding of purine catabolism and the salvage
enzyme HGPRT
OVERVIEW
Nucleotides are needed for DNA and RNA synthesis (DNA replication and
transcription) and for energy transfer. Nucleoside triphosphates (ATP and GTP)
provide energy for reactions that would otherwise be extremely unfavorable in
the cell.
Ribose 5 phosphate for nucleotide synthesis is derived from the hexose mono
phosphate shunt and is activated by the addition of pyrophosphate from ATP,
forming phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate (PRPP) using PRPP synthetase. Cells
synthesize nucleotides in 2 ways: de novo synthesis and salvage pathways.
• In de novo synthesis, which occurs predominantly in the liver, purines
and pyrimidines are synthesized from smaller precursors, and PRPP is
added to the pathway at some point.
• In the salvage pathways, preformed purine and pyrimidine bases can be
converted into nucleotides by salvage enzymes distinct from those of de
novo synthesis. Purine and pyrimidine bases for salvage enzymes may
arise from:
– Synthesis in the liver and transport to other tissues
– Digestion of endogenous nucleic acids (cell death, RNA turnover)
In many cells, the capacity for de novo synthesis to supply purines and pyrimidines
is insufficient, and the salvage pathway is essential for adequate nucleotide
synthesis.
In Lesch Nyhan disease, an enzyme for purine salvage (hypoxanthine guanine
phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate transferase, HPRT) is absent or deficient. People
with this genetic deficiency have CNS deterioration, intellectual disability, and
spastic cerebral palsy associated with compulsive self mutilation. Cells in the basal
ganglia of the brain (fine motor control) normally have very high HPRT activity.
Patients also all have hyperuricemia because purines cannot be salvaged, causing
gout.
28
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
HMP shunt
MedicalGenetics OH
Ribose 5 P P O
R
ATP
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences PRPP synthetase
Phosphoribosyl P P
pyrophosphate P O
(PRPP) R
Purines
Pyrimidines
Salvage De novo
pathways synthesis
Base
Nucleotides P O
R
DNA, RNA
Figure I 18 1. Nucleotide Synthesis
Figure I 18 1. Nucleotide Synthesis by Salvage and De Novo Pathways
by Salvage and De Novo Pathways
PYRIMIDINE SYNTHESIS
Pyrimidines are synthesized de novo in the cytoplasm from aspartate, CO2, and
glutamine. Synthesis involves a cytoplasmic carbamoyl phosphate synthetase
that differs from the mitochondrial enzyme with the same name used in the
urea cycle.
28
CHAPTER 18 | PURINE AND PYRIMIDINE METABOLISM
OROTIC ACIDURIA NOTE
Two Orotic Acidurias
Several days after birth, an infant was observed to have severe anemia,
• Hyperammonemia (no megaloblastic
which was found to be megaloblastic. There was no evidence of
hepatomegaly or splenomegaly. The newborn was started on a bottle fed anemia)
regimen containing folate, vitamin B12, vitamin B6, and iron. One week
– Pathway: urea cycle
later the infant’s condition did not improve. The pediatrician noted that
the infant’s urine contained a crystalline residue, which was analyzed – Enzyme deficient: OTC
and determined to be orotic acid. Lab tests indicated no evidence of
• Megaloblastic anemia (no
hyperammonemia. The infant was given a formula which contained
hyperammonemia)
uridine. Shortly thereafter, the infant’s condition improved significantly.
– Pathway: pyrimidine synthesis
Orotic aciduria is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a defect in
uridine monophosphate (UMP) synthase. This enzyme contains two activities, – Enzyme deficient: UMP synthase
orotate phosphoribosyltransferase and orotidine decarboxylase. The lack
Folate and B12 deficiency (megaloblastic
of pyrimidines impairs nucleic acid synthesis needed for hematopoiesis,
explaining the megaloblastic anemia in this infant. Orotic acid accumulates anemia but no orotic aciduria)
and spills into the urine, resulting in orotic acid crystals and orotic acid
urinary obstruction. The presence of orotic acid in urine might suggest
that the defect could be ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency, but
the lack of hyperammonemia rules out a defect in the urea cycle. Uridine
administration relieves the symptoms by bypassing the defect in the
pyrimidine pathway. Uridine is salvaged to UMP, which feedback inhibits
carbamoyl phosphate synthase 2, preventing orotic acid formation.
28
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Carbamoyl
phosphate
Aspartate
CO2 + glutamine synthetase 2 Carbamoyl
Orotic acid
+ATP phosphate
(Cytoplasm)
MedicalGenetics
PRPP
UMP synthase
CO2
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
UMP
UDP
Ribonucleotide
Hydroxyurea –
BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY reductase
dUDP CTP
Cotrimoxazole contains the synergistic
antibiotics sulfamethoxazole and
dUMP
trimethoprim, which inhibit different steps in
the prokaryotic synthesis of tetrahydrofolate.
N5N10 methylene THF Thymidylate
synthase
–
THF DHF
PABA
Dihydrofolate
5 Fluorouracil
reductase
– dTMP
sulfamethoxazole
Methotrexate (eukaryotic)
folic Trimethoprim (prokaryotic)
acid Pyrimethamine (protozoal)
Figure I 18 2. De Novo Pyrimidine Synthesis
Figure I 18 2. De Novo Pyrimidine Synthesis
DHF
The primary end product of pyrimidine synthesis is UMP. In the conversion of
UMP to dTMP, 3 important enzymes are ribonucleotide reductase, thymidylate
synthase, and dihydrofolate reductase; all are targets of antineoplastic drugs.
trimethoprim
THF
28
CHAPTER 18 | PURINE AND PYRIMIDINE METABOLISM
Table I 18 1. Important Enzymes of Pyrimidine Synthesis
Enzyme Function Drug
Ribonucleotide Reduces all NDPs to Hydroxyurea (S phase)
reductase dNDPs for DNA synthesis
Thymidylate Methylates dUMP to 5 Fluorouracil (S phase)
synthase dTMP
Requires THF
Dihydrofolate Converts DHF to THF Methotrexate (eukaryotic)
reductase Without DHFR, thymi (S phase) HY HY
(DHFR) dylate synthesis will
Trimethoprim (prokaryotic)
eventually stop MY MY
Pyrimethamine (protozoal)
LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Ribonucleotide Reductase
Ribonucleotide reductase is required for the formation of the dMeoExDyrIiUboMnucleo YIELD MEDIUM YIELD
tides for DNA synthesis.
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
• All 4 nucleotide substrates must be diphosphates.
• dADP and dATP strongly inhibit ribonucleotide reductase.
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
• Hydroxyurea, an anticancer drug, blocks DNA synthesis indirectly by
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
inhibiting ribonucleotide reductase.
UDP Ribonucleotide dUDP dUMP dTMP
CDP reductase dCDP
ADP dADP
GDP dGDP
–
Hydroxyurea dADP, dATP
Figure I 18 3. Ribonucleotide Reductase
Figure I 18 3. Ribonucleotide Reductase
PYRIMIDINE CATABOLISM
Pyrimidines may be completely catabolized (NH4 + is produced) or recycled by
pyrimidine salvage enzymes.
PURINE SYNTHESIS
Purines are synthesized de novo beginning with PRPP. The most important
enzyme is PRPP amidotransferase, which catalyzes the first and rate limiting
reaction of the pathway. It is inhibited by the 3 purine nucleotide end products
AMP, GMP, and IMP.
28
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
The drugs allopurinol (used for gout) and 6 mercaptopurine (antineoplastic) also
inhibit PRPP amidotransferase. These drugs are purine analogs which must be
converted to their respective nucleotides by HGPRT within cells.
• The amino acids glycine, aspartate, and glutamine are used in purine
MedicalGenetics
synthesis.
• Tetrahydrofolate is required for synthesis of all the purines.
• Inosine monophosphate (contains the purine base hypoxanthine) is the
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences precursor for AMP and GMP.
Ribose 5 Phosphate
PRPP synthetase
BRIDGE TO MICROBIOLOGY
Protozoan and multicellular parasites and
P P
many obligate parasites, such as Chlamydia, PRPP P O
R
cannot synthesize purines de novo because
they lack the necessary genes in the purine AMP Allopurinol nucleotide
pathway. However, they have elaborate
IMP PRPP 6 Mercaptopurine
salvage mechanisms for acquiring purines _
GMP amidotransferase nucleotide
from the host to synthesize their own nucleic
acids to grow.
NH2
P O
5 Phosphoribosylamine
R
Glycine, aspartate, glutamine
THF as carbon donor
Hypoxanthine
Inosine
P O
monophosphate (IMP) R
Amino from Amino from
glutamine aspartate
GMP AMP
Allopurinol HGPRT Allopurinol nucleotide
6 mercaptopurine 6 Mercaptopurine nucleotide
PRPP
Figure FiIgur1e8 4I.18De4. DNeovoNovo PPuurirninee SyntShyesnitshesis
288
CHAPTER 18 | PURINE AND PYRIMIDINE METABOLISM
PURINE CATABOLISM AND THE SALVAGE ENzYME HGPRT
Excess purine nucleotides or those released from DNA and RNA by nucleases
are catabolized first to nucleosides (loss of Pi) and then to free purine bases
(release of ribose or deoxyribose). Excess nucleoside monophosphates may
accumulate when:
• RNA is normally digested by nucleases (mRNAs and other types of RNAs
are continuously turned over in normal cells).
• Dying cells release DNA and RNA, which is digested by nucleases.
• The concentration of free Pi decreases as it may in galactosemia, heredi
tary fructose intolerance, and glucose 6 phosphatase deficiency.
Salvage enzymes recycle normally about 90% of these purines, and 10% are
converted to uric acid and excreted in urine. When purine catabolism is
increased significantly, a person is at risk for developing hyperuricemia and
potentially gout.
Purine catabolism to uric acid and salvage of the purine bases hypoxanthine
(derived from adenosine) and guanine are shown below.
HGPRT deficiency (Lesch Nyhan syndrome)
• Spastic cerebral palsy
• Self mutilation (hands, lips)
• Hyperuricemia and gout
• Early death
ATP, GTP AMP IMP • X linked (recessive)
High energy compounds
DNA and RNA GMP Salvage
pathway
HGPRT
Pi NH3 Ribose P
(HPRT)
AMP Adenosine Inosine Hypoxanthine
90%
Adenosine Purine
deaminase nucleoside
phosphorylase and or
GMP Guanosine Guanine
Xanthine
Pi Ribose P
Excretion pathway
Allopurinol –
Xanthine oxidase
Adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency Dietary purines converted to uric 10%
• Severe combined immunodeficiency acid by enterocytes and added to
Uric acid
• Autosomal recessive the blood for excretion in the urine
Figure I 18 5. Purine Excretion and Salvage Pathways
Figure I 18 5. Purine Excretion and Salvage Pathways
28
Immunology
MY
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY LY
Biochemistry
High Yield H
Adenosine Deaminase Deficiency
Adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency, an autosomal recessive MEDIdUisMorder, YIELcDauses a ME
type of severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID). Lacking both B cell and
LOW YIELD
T cell function, children are multiply infected with many organisms (Pneumocystis
MedicalGenetics
carinii, Candida) and do not survive without treatment. Enzyme replacement
therapy and bone marrow transplantation may be used. Experimental gene
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
therapy trials have not yet yielded completely successful cures.
REINFORCEMENT RE
BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY High levels of dATP accumulate in red cells of ADA patients and inhibit ribonu
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences HY
Thiazide diuretics (hydrochlorothiazide and cleotide reductase, thereby inhibiting the production of other essential
chlorthalidone) may cause hyperuricemia. deoxynucleotide precursors for DNA synthesis (see Figure I 18 3). Although MY it is
believed that the impaired DNA synthesis contributes to dysfunction of T cells and
B cells, it is not known why the main effects are limited to these cell types. LY
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY Hyperuricemia and Gout High Yield H
Treatment of large tumors with Hyperuricemia may be produced by overproduction of uric acidMEDIoUrMunderexcYreIELD ME
chemotherapeutic regimens or radiation may tion of uric acid by the kidneys. Hyperuricemia may progress to acute and chronic
LOW YIELD
gouty arthritis if uric acid (monosodium urate) is deposited in joints and sur
cause “tumor lysis syndrome” and excessive
rounding soft tissue, where it causes inflammation. Uric acid is produced from
excretion of uric acid, resulting in gout. The
excess endogenous purines as shown in Figure I 18 5, and is also produced from
cause of the excessive uric acid is the FUNDAMENTALS FUN
dietary purines (digestion of nucleic acid in the intestine) by intestinal epithelia.
destruction of the cancer cell’s nucleic acid Both sources of uric acid are transported in the blood to the kidneysREINFORfCoErMENexTcretion RE
into purines undergoing turnover. in urine.
Allopurinol inhibits xanthine oxidase and also can reduce purine synthesis by
inhibiting PRPP amidotransferase, provided HGPRT is active (see Figure I 18 4).
Hyperuricemia and gout often accompany the following conditions:
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Gout • Lesch Nyhan syndrome (no purine salvage)
Acute gouty arthritis, seen most commonly in • Partial deficiency of HGPRT
males, results from precipitation of • Alcoholism (lactate and urate compete for same transport system in the
monosodium urate crystals in joints. The kidney)
crystals, identified as negatively birefringent • Glucose 6 phosphatase deficiency
and needle shaped, initiate neutrophil
• Hereditary fructose intolerance (aldolase B deficiency)
mediated and acute inflammation, often first
• Galactose 1 phosphate uridyl transferase deficiency (galactosemia)
affecting the big toe. Chronic gout may
manifest over time as tophi (deposits of • Mutations in PRPP synthetase that lower Km HY
monosodium urate) in soft tissue around
In the last 2 diseases, phosphorylated sugars accumulate, decreasing the availMabYle
joints, leading to chronic inflammation Pi and increasing AMP (which cannot be phosphorylated to ADP and ATP). The
involving granulomas. excess AMP is converted to uric acid. LY
• Acute attacks of gout are treated with
colchicine or indomethacin to reduce Lesch Nyhan Syndrome High Yield H
the inflammation.
Lesch Nyhan syndrome is an X linked recessive condition involvMingE:DIUM YIELD ME
• Chronic hyperuricemia, because of
• Near complete deficiency of HGPRT activity LOW YIELD
underexcretion, is treated with a
• Intellectual disability
uricosuric drug (probenecid).
• Spastic cerebral palsy with compulsive biting of hands aFnUdNDAlMipEsNTALS FUN
• Overproduction of uric acid and
• Hyperuricemia
REINFORCEMENT R
chronic gout are treated with
• Death often in first decade
allopurinol.
290
CHAPTER 18 | PURINE AND PYRIMIDINE METABOLISM
Over 100 distinct mutations of the HGPRT gene located on the X chromosome
have been reported to give rise to Lesch Nyhan syndrome. These mutations
include complete deletions of the gene, point mutations that result in an increased
Km for hypoxanthine and guanine for the enzyme, and mutations that cause the
encoded enzyme to have a short half life.
LESCH NYHAN SYNDROME
The parents of a 9 month old infant were concerned that their son
BRIDGE TO PHARMACOLOGY
appeared generally weak, had difficulty moving his arms and legs,
Febuxostat is a nonpurine inhibitor of
repeatedly bit his lips, and frequently seemed to be in pain. The infant
xanthine oxidase.
was brought to the pediatrician. The parents mentioned that since the
baby was born, they often noticed tiny, orange colored particles when
they changed the infant’s diapers. Lab analysis of uric acid in urine was
normalized to the urinary creatinine in the infant, and it was found that
the amount was 3 times greater than the normal range.
One of the earliest signs of Lesch Nyhan syndrome is the appearance of BRIDGE TO MEDICAL GENETICS
orange crystals in diapers. They are needle shaped sodium urate crystals.
There are a large number of known
Without the salvaging of hypoxanthine and guanine by HGPRT, the purines
mutations in the HGPRT gene. These have
are shunted toward the excretion pathway. This is compounded by the lack
varying effects on the Km for the enzyme
of regulatory control of the PRPP amidotransferase in the purine synthesis
product, generating varying degrees of
pathway, resulting in the synthesis of even more purines in the body. The large
severity. This concept is known as allelic
amounts of urate will cause crippling, gouty arthritis and urate nephropathy.
heterogeneity.
Renal failure is usually the cause of death. Treatment with allopurinol will ease
the amount of urate deposits formed.
29
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Review Questions
Select the ONE best answer.
1. A 6 month old boy becomes progressively lethargic and pale and shows
MedicalGenetics
delayed motor development. Laboratory evaluation reveals normal blood
urea nitrogen (BUN), low serum iron, hemoglobin 4.6 g/dL, and leukope
nia. His bone marrow shows marked megaloblastosis, which did not
respond to treatment with iron, folic acid, vitamin B12, or pyridoxine. His
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences urine developed abundant white precipitate identified as orotic acid. The
underlying defect causing the megaloblastic anemia in this child is most
likely in which of the following pathways?
A. Homocysteine metabolism
B. Pyrimidine synthesis
C. Urea synthesis
D. Uric acid synthesis
E. Heme synthesis
2. Patients with Lesch Nyhan syndrome have hyperuricemia, indicating an
increased biosynthesis of purine nucleotides, and markedly decreased levels
of hypoxanthine phosphoribosyl transferase (HPRT). The hyperuricemia
can be explained on the basis of a decrease in which regulator of purine
biosynthesis?
A. ATP
B. GDP
C. Glutamine
D. IMP
E. PRPP
3. A 12 week old infant with a history of persistent diarrhea and candidiasis is
seen for a respiratory tract infection with Pneumocystis jiroveci. A chest
x ray confirms pneumonia and reveals absence of a thymic shadow. Trace
IgG is present in his serum, but IgA and IgM are absent. His red blood cells
completely lack an essential enzyme in purine degradation. The product
normally formed by this enzyme is
A. guanine monophosphate
B. hypoxanthine
C. inosine
D. xanthine
E. xanthine monophosphate
29
CHAPTER 18 | PURINE AND PYRIMIDINE METABOLISM
Items 4 and 5
The anticancer drug 6 mercaptopurine is deactivated by the enzyme xanthine
oxidase. A cancer patient being treated with 6 mercaptopurine develops hyper
uricemia, and the physician decides to give the patient allopurinol.
4. What effect will allopurinol have on the activity of 6 mercaptopurine?
A. Enhanced deactivation of 6 mercaptopurine
B. Enhanced elimination of 6 mercaptopurine as uric acid
C. Enhanced retention and potentiation of activity
D. Decreased inhibition of PRPP glutamylamidotransferase
5. Resistance of neoplastic cells to the chemotherapeutic effect of
6 mercaptopurine would most likely involve loss or inactivation of a gene
encoding
A. thymidylate synthase
B. hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase
C. purine nucleoside pyrophosphorylase
D. orotic acid phosphoribosyltransferase
E. adenosine deaminase
29
Immunology
PART I | BIOCHEMISTRY
Biochemistry
Answers
1. Answer: B. Accumulation of orotic acid indicates megaloblastic anemia
arises because pyrimidines are required for DNA synthesis.
MedicalGenetics
2. Answer: D. IMP is a feedback inhibitor of PRPP amidophosphoribosyl
transferase, the first reaction in the biosynthesis of purines. IMP is formed
by the HPRT reaction in the salvage of hypoxanthine.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences 3. Answer: C. The child most likely has severe combined immunodeficiency
caused by adenosine deaminase deficiency. This enzyme deaminates ade
nosine (a nucleoside) to form inosine (another nucleoside). Hypoxanthine
and xanthine are both purine bases, and the monophosphates are nucleo
tides.
4. Answer: C. Because allopurinol inhibits xanthine oxidase, the
6 mercaptopurine will not be deactivated as rapidly.
5. Answer: B. HPRT is required for activation of 6 mercaptopurine to its
ribonucleotide and inhibition of purine synthesis. The other enzymes listed
are not targets for this drug.
29
PART II
MEDICAL GENETIC

1
Single Gene Disorders
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Interpret scenarios about basic definitions
❏ Use knowledge of major modes of inheritance
❏ Understand important principles that can characterize single gene
diseases
BASIC DEFINITIONS
Chromosomes
Humans are composed of 2 groups of cells:
• Gametes. Ova and sperm cells, which are haploid, have one copy of each
NOTE
type of chromosome (1–22, X or Y). This DNA is transmitted to offspring.
• Gene: basic unit of inheritance
• Somatic cells (cells other than gametes). Nearly all somatic cells are diploid,
having 2 copies of each type of autosome (1–22) and either XX or XY. • Locus: location of a gene on a
chromosome
Diploid cells
• Homologous chromosomes. The 2 chromosomes in each diploid pair are • Allele: different forms of a gene
said to be homologs, or homologous chromosomes. They contain the same
• Genotype: alleles found at a locus
genes, but because one is of paternal origin and one is of maternal origin,
they may have different alleles at some loci. • Phenotype: physically observable
• X and Y chromosomes, or the sex chromosomes, have some homologous features
regions but the majority of genes are different. The regions that are
• Homozygote: alleles at a locus are the
homologous are sometimes referred to as pseudoautosomal regions.
same
During meiosis 1 of male spermatogenesis, the X and Y chromosomes pair
in the pseudoautosomal regions, allowing the chromosomes to segregate
• Heterozygote: alleles at a locus are
into different cells.
different
• Dominant: requires only one copy of
Genes
the mutation to produce disease
• Gene. Physically a gene consists of a sequence of DNA that encodes a
• Recessive: requires 2 copies of the
specific protein (or a nontranslated RNA; for example: tRNA, rRNA, or
snRNA). mutation to produce disease
• Locus. The physical location of a gene on a chromosome is termed a locus.
NOTE
• Alleles. Variation (mutation) in the DNA sequence of a gene produces a
new allele at that locus. Many genes have multiple alleles. Although the term alleles is used most
• Polymorphism. When a specific site on a chromosome has multiple alleles frequently with genes, noncoding DNA can
in the population, it is said to be polymorphic (many forms). also have alleles of specific sequences.
297
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
For example, the β globin gene encodes a protein (β globin). It has been mapped
to chromosome 11p15.5 indicating its locus, a specific location on chromosome
11. Throughout human history there have been many mutations in the β globin
gene, and each mutation has created a new allele in the population. The β globin
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences locus is therefore polymorphic. Some alleles cause no clinical disease, but others,
like the sickle cell allele, are associated with significant disease. Included among
the disease causing alleles are those associated with sickle cell anemia and several
associated with β thalassemia.
Genotype
The specific DNA sequence at a locus is termed a genotype. In diploid somatic
cells a genotype may be:
• Homozygous if the individual has the same allele on both homologs
(homologous chromosomes) at that locus.
• Heterozygous if the individual has different alleles on the two homologs
(homologous chromosomes) at that locus.
NOTE Phenotype
Major types of single gene mutations: The phenotype is generally understood as the expression of the genotype in terms
of observable characteristics.
• Missense
• Nonsense
Mutations
• Deletion
A mutation is an alteration in DNA sequence (thus, mutations produce new alleles).
When mutations occur in cells giving rise to gametes, the mutations can be transmitted
• Insertion
to future generations. Missense mutations result in the substitution of a single amino
• Frameshift acid in the polypeptide chain (e.g., sickle cell disease is caused by a missense mutation
that produces a substitution of valine for glutamic acid in the β globin polypeptide).
Nonsense mutations produce a stop codon, resulting in premature termination of
translation and a truncated protein. Nucleotide bases may be inserted or deleted.
When the number of inserted or deleted bases is a multiple of 3, the mutation is said to
be in frame. If not a multiple of 3, the mutation is a frameshift, which alters all codons
downstream of the mutation, typically producing a truncated or severely altered
protein product. Mutations can occur in promoter and other regulatory regions or in
genes for transcription factors that bind to these regions. This can decrease or increase
the amount of gene product produced in the cell. (For a complete description of these
and other mutations, see Section I, Chapter 4: Translation; Mutations.)
Mutations can also be classified according to their phenotypic effects. Mutations
that cause a missing protein product or cause decreased activity of the protein are
termed loss of function. Those that produce a protein product with a new function
or increased activity are termed gain of function.
Recurrence risk
The recurrence risk is the probability that the offspring of a couple will express a
genetic disease. For example, in the mating of a normal homozygote with a
heterozygote who has a dominant disease causing allele, the recurrence risk for
each offspring is 1/2, or 50%. It is important to remember that each reproductive
event is statistically independent of all previous events. Therefore, the recurrence
risk remains the same regardless of the number of previously affected or unaffected
offspring. Determining the mode of inheritance of a disease (e.g., autosomal
29
CHAPTER 1 | SINGLE GENE DISORDERS
dominant versus autosomal recessive) enables one to assign an appropriate
recurrence risk for a family.
Pedigrees
A patient’s family history is diagrammed in a pedigree. The first affected individual
to be identified in the family is termed the proband.
Generation
I
1 2
II
1 2 3 4 5 6
III
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
S
IV
1 2 3
Male Dead
Female Mating
Unknown sex Consanguineous or
incestuous mating
Affected
Sibship
Carrier of an autosomal
recessive (Optional) Dizygotic twins
Carrier of an X linked
recessive (Optional)
Monozygotic twins
Stillborn
SB
HY HY
Figure FigureII 1II 11. 1.PedPiegdreigeree NomNeonmcleantucrleature
MY MY
LY LY
MAJOR MODES OF INHERITANCE
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Autosomal Dominant Inheritance
A number of features in a pedigree help identify autosomal domiMnaEntDIUM inheYriItEanLcDe: MEDIUM YIELD
• Because affected individuals must receive a disease causing geLnOeW frYomIELD an LOW YIELD
affected parent, the disease is typically observed in multiple generations of
a pedigree.
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
• Skipped generations are not typically seen because two unaffected parents
cannot transmit a disease causing allele to their offspring REIN(aFnORCEexMceEpNtiTon REINFORCEMENT
occurs when there is reduced penetrance).
• Because these genes are located on autosomes, males and females are
affected in roughly equal frequencies.
299
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
Autosomal dominant alleles are relatively rare in populations, so the typical
mating pattern is a heterozygous affected individual (Aa genotype) mating with a
homozygous normal individual (aa genotype). Note that, by convention, the
dominant allele is shown in uppercase (A) and the recessive allele is shown in
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences lowercase (a). The recurrence risk is thus 50%, and half the children, on average,
will be affected with the disease. If both parents are heterozygous, the recurrence
risk is 75%.
NOTE
Autosomal Dominant Diseases
• Familial hypercholesterolemia
Figure II 1 2. Autosomal Dominant Inheritance
Figure II 1 2. Autosomal Dominant Inheritance
(LDL receptor deficiency)
• Huntington disease
A a
• Neurofibromatosis type 1
a Aa aa
• Marfan syndrome
• Acute intermittent porphyria
a Aa aa
A Punnett square: Affected offspring (Aa) are shaded.
HY
Figure IIFigu1re 3. IIRe1cur3re.ncReecurrence RiRskisk forforthetheMatinMgatingof Affectoedf AffeIncdteidvidual In(Adiav)iduawlith MY(Aa)
with a HomozygoausHomozygous UnafUfencatfefdected IndIinvdidivuiadlual (aa) u(saian)g ausPinugnnett aSqPuuarnenett Square
LY
High Yield H
Autosomal Recessive Inheritance
Important features that distinguish autosomal recessive inheritance:MEDIUM YIELD ME
• Because autosomal recessive alleles are clinically expressed onLlyOW inYIEthLeD
homozygous state, the offspring must inherit one copy of the disease caus
ing allele from each parent.
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
• In contrast to autosomal dominant diseases, autosomal recessive diseases
are typically seen in only one generation of a pedigree. REINFORCEMENT RE
• Because these genes are located on autosomes, males and females are
affected in roughly equal frequencies.
Most commonly, a homozygote is produced by the union of two heterozygous
(carrier) parents. The recurrence risk for offspring of such matings is 25%.
30
CHAPTER 1 | SINGLE GENE DISORDERS
Consanguinity (the mating of related individuals) is sometimes seen in recessive
pedigrees because individuals who share common ancestors are more likely to
carry the same recessive disease causing alleles.
A consanguineous mating has produced two affected offspring.
Figure IIFigu1re 4. IIPe1digr4e.ePedigree forfor anan AAuuttoossoommaall RecessivReecessiveDisease Disease
Determining the Recurrence Risk for an Individual Whose Phenotype Is NOTE
Known. In Figure II 1 4, individual IV 1 may wish to know his risk of being a
Autosomal Recessive Diseases
carrier. Because his phenotype is known, there are only 3 possible genotypes he
can have, assuming complete penetrance of the disease producing allele. He • Sickle cell anemia
cannot be homozygous for the recessive allele (aa). Two of the remaining 3
• Cystic fibrosis
possibilities are carriers (Aa and aA), and one is homozygous normal (AA). Thus,
his risk of being a carrier is 2/3, or 0.67 (67%). • Phenylketonuria (PKU)
• Tay Sachs disease (hexosaminidase A
A a deficiency)
A AA Aa
NOTE
a Aa aa
Cystic fibrosis is an important topic on the
exam.
The affected genotype (aa) is shaded. HY HY
MY MY
Figure FigIIure1 5I.I 1Rec5u.rreRnceecurrence RiRskisk for fothre Mtheating Mationfg of
Two HeterozTygwoousHeterozygous CarrieCrasrriers (A(Aaa)) of oafReacessRiveecessiveMutation Mutation LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
X Linked Recessive Inheritance
MEDIUM YIELD MEDIUM YIELD
Properties of X linked recessive inheritance
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
Because males have only one copy of the X chromosome, they are said to be
hemizygous (hemi = “half”) for the X chromosome. If a recessive disease causing
mutation occurs on the X chromosome, a male will be affected FwUiNthDAMEthNeTALSdisease. FUNDAMENTALS
• Because males require only one copy of the mutation to eRxEpIrNesFsORCEMEthNeT disease REINFORCEMENT
and females require 2 copies, X linked recessive diseases are seen much
more commonly in males than in females.
30
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
• Skipped generations are commonly seen because an affected male can
transmit the disease causing mutation to a heterozygous daughter, who is
unaffected but who can transmit the disease causing allele to her sons.
• Male to male transmission is not seen in X linked inheritance; this helps
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
distinguish it from autosomal inheritance.
NOTE
X Linked Recessive Diseases
• Duchenne muscular dystrophy
• Lesch Nyhan syndrome (hypoxanthine
guanine phosphoribosyltransferase
[HGPRT] deficiency)
• Glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency
• Hemophilia A and B
Figure II 1 6. XLinked Recessive Inheritance
• Red green color blindness Figure II 1 6. X Linked Recessive Inheritance
• Menkes disease
Recurrence risks
• Ornithine transcarbamoylase (OTC)
deficiency Figure II 1 7 shows the recurrence risks for X linked recessive diseases.
• SCID (IL receptor γ chain deficiency) • Affected male–homozygous normal female: All of the daughters will be
heterozygous carriers; all of the sons will be homozygous normal.
• Normal male–carrier female: On average, half of the sons will be
affected and half of the daughters will be carriers. Note that in this case,
the recurrence rate is different depending on the sex of the child. If the
fetal sex is known, the recurrence rate for a daughter is 0, and that for a
son is 50%. If the sex of the fetus is not known, then the recurrence
rate is multiplied by 1/2, the probability that the fetus is a male
versus a female. Therefore if the sex is unknown, the recurrence risk
is 25%.
x Y X Y
X Xx XY X XX XY
X Xx XY x Xx xY
A B
A. Affected male–homozygous normal female
(X chromosome with mutation is in lower case)
B. Normal male–carrier female
Figure II 1Fig7u.re RecIuIrre1nce7. RecurrenceRisks Risks forfor XXLLininkkeedd RecesRsievceessive Diseases Diseases
30
CHAPTER 1 | SINGLE GENE DISORDERS
X inactivation NOTE
Normal males inherit an X chromosome from their mother and a Y chromosome Xinactivation occurs early in the female
from their father, whereas normal females inherit an X chromosome from each
embryo and is random, fixed, and
parent. Because the Y chromosome carries only about 50 protein coding genes
incomplete. In a cell, all X chromosomes but
and the X chromosome carries hundreds of protein coding genes, a mechanism
one are inactivated.
must exist to equalize the amount of protein encoded by X chromosomes in males
and females. This mechanism, termed X inactivation, occurs in the blastocyst
(~100 cells) during the development of female embryos. When an X chromosome NOTE
is inactivated, its DNA is not transcribed into mRNA, and the chromosome is
Genetic mosaicism is the presence of 2 or
visualized under the microscope as a highly condensed Barr body in the nuclei of
more cell lines with different karyotypes in
interphase cells. X inactivation has several important
characteristics: an individual. It arises from mitotic
nondisjunction. The number of cell lines that
• It is random—in some cells of the female embryo, the X chromosome
develop and their relative proportions are
inherited from the father is inactivated, and in others the X chromosome
influenced by the timing of nondisjunction
inherited from the mother is inactivated. Like coin tossing, this is a
during embryogenesis and the viability of the
random process. As shown in Figure II 1 6, most women have their
paternal X chromosome active in approximately 50% of their cells and the aneuploid cells produced.
maternal X chromosome active in approximately 50% of their cells. Thus,
females are said to be mosaics with respect to the active X chromosome.
• It is fixed—once inactivation of an X chromosome occurs in a cell, the
same X chromosome is inactivated in all descendants of the cell.
• It is incomplete—there are regions throughout the X chromosome,
including the tips of both the long and short arms, that are not
inactivated.
• X chromosome inactivation is permanent in somatic cells and reversible in
developing germ line cells. Both X chromosomes are active during
oogenesis.
• All X chromosomes in a cell are inactivated except one. For example,
females with 3 X chromosomes in each cell (see Chapter 3) have two X
chromosomes inactivated in each cell (thus, two Barr bodies can be
visualized in an interphase cell). X chromosome inactivation is thought
to be mediated by >1 mechanism.
• A gene called XIST has been identified as the primary gene that causes X
inactivation. XIST produces an RNA product that coats the chromosome,
helping produce its inactivation.
• Condensation into heterochromatin
• Methylation of gene regions on the X chromosome
30
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Paternal X Maternal
Barr body X active
of
Female
Number
Blastocyst
~100 cells 5/95 50/50 95/5
Percentage of cells with
paternal/maternal X active
Paternal Maternal X
X active Barr body
Figure II 1 8. Inactivation of the XChromosome during
Figure II 1 8. Inactivation of the X Chromosome during
Embryogenesis is a Random Process
Embryogenesis is a Random Process
Manifesting (female) heterozygotes
Normal females have two copies of the X chromosome, so they usually require two
copies of the mutation to express the disease. However, because X inactivation is a
random process, a heterozygous female will occasionally express an X linked
recessive mutation because, by random chance, most of the X chromosomes
carrying the normal allele have been inactivated. Such females are termed mani
festing heterozygotes. Because they usually have at least a small population of active
X chromosomes carrying the normal allele, their disease expression is typically
milder than that of hemizygous males.
Recall Question
Which of the following is an X linked recessive disease?
A. Acute intermittent porphyria
B. Duchenne muscular dystrophy
C. Huntington disease
D. Marfan syndrome
Answer: B
304
CHAPTER 1 | SINGLE GENE DISORDERS
Y Chromosome Highlights
• The SRY (sex determining region) gene is a transcription factor that
HY HY
initiates male development.
• The q arm of Y chromosomes contains a large block of heterochromatin. MY MY
• Microdeletions of Yq in males result in nonobstructive azoospermia. LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
X Linked Dominant Inheritance
CLINICAL CORRELATE
There are relatively few diseases whose inheritance is classified MaEsDIUXM linked YIELD Fragile MEDXIUMSyndromeYIELD
dominant. Fragile X syndrome is an important example. In this condition, females
are differently affected than males, and whereas penetrance in males LO is W 100% Y , IELD that Males: 100% LOWpenetranYcIeELD
in females is approximately 60%. The typical fragile X patient described is male.
• Intellectual disability
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
As in X linked recessive inheritance, male–male transmission of the disease
• Large ears
causing mutation is not seen.
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
• Prominent jaw
• Heterozygous females are affected. Because females have 2 X chromo
somes (and thus 2 chances to inherit an X linked disease causing muta • Macro orchidism (usually
tion) and males have only one, X linked dominant diseases are seen about postpubertal)
twice as often in females as in males.
Females: 60% penetrance
• As in autosomal dominant inheritance, the disease phenotype is seen in
multiple generations of a pedigree; skipped generations are relatively • Intellectual disability
unusual.
• Examine the children of an affected male (II 1 in the figure below). None
of his sons will be affected, but all of his daughters have the disease
(assuming complete penetrance).
NOTE
The penetrance of a disease causing
mutation is the percentage of individuals
who are known to have the disease causing
genotype who display the disease phenotype
(develop symptoms).
Figure II 1 9. XLinked Dominant Inheritance
Figure II 1 9. X Linked Dominant Inheritance
Recurrence Risks
Figure II 1 10 shows the recurrence risks for X linked dominant inheritance.
• Affected male–homozygous normal female: None of the sons are affected;
all of the daughters are affected. Note that in this case, the recurrence rate
is different depending on the sex of the child. If the fetal sex is known, the
recurrence rate for a daughter is 100%, and that for a son is 0%. If the sex
of the fetus is not known, then the recurrence rate is multiplied by 1/2,
the probability that the fetus is a male versus a female. Therefore if the
sex is unknown, the recurrence risk is 50%.
• Normal male–heterozygous affected female: on average, 50% of sons are
affected and 50% of daughters are affected.
30
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
NOTE
Affected male–homozygous normal Normal male–heterozygous
X Linked Dominant Diseases female (the mutation carrying affected female
chromosome is upper case)
• Hypophosphatemic rickets
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences X Y x Y
• Fragile X syndrome
x Xx xY X Xx XY
x Xx xY x xx xY
Figure IIFig1ure10. II R1ec1u0rr.enceRecurrence RisRksisks ffoorr XXLinkLedinkedDominaDntominantInheritanceInheritance
Affected individuals have an affected parent?
(Multiple generations affected?)
Yes No
Dominant Recessive
Male male All (or almost all) affected
transmission? are males?
Yes No Yes No
Autosomal May be X X linked Autosomal
dominant dominant recessive recessive
No
Are all daughters of an
affected male also affected?
Yes
X dominant
Note: Iftransmission occurs only through affected mothers and never through affected sons,
the pedigree is likely to reflect mitochondrial inheritance.
Figure II 1 11. A Basic Decision Tree for Determining
Figure II I 11. A Basic Decision Tree for Determining
the Mtohdee Modeof oInfheIrnithaenrcietance inina aPediPgeredeigree
30
MY MY
LY CHAPTER 1 | SINGLYLE GENE DISORDERS
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Mitochondrial Inheritance
Mitochondria, which are cytoplasmic organelles involved in cellMulEarDIUM respiratYioInE,LD MEDIUM YIELD
have their own chromosomes, each of which contains 16,569 DNA base pairs (bp)
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
arranged in a circular molecule. This DNA encodes 13 proteins that are subunits of
complexes in the electron transport and oxidative phosphorylation processes (see
Part I, Chapter 13). In addition, mitochondrial DNA encodes 22 transfer RNAs
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
and 2 ribosomal RNAs.
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
Because a sperm cell contributes no mitochondria to the egg cell during fertiliza
tion, mitochondrial DNA is inherited exclusively through females. Pedigrees for
mitochondrial diseases thus display a distinct mode of inheritance: Diseases are
transmitted only from affected females to their offspring.
• Both males and females are affected.
• Transmission of the disease is only from a female.
• All offspring of an affected female are affected.
• None of the offspring of an affected male is affected.
• Diseases are typically neuropathies and/or myopathies.
Heteroplasmy
A typical cell contains hundreds of mitochondria in its cytoplasm, and each
mitochondrion has its own copy of the mitochondrial genome. When a specific
mutation occurs in some of the mitochondria, this mutation can be unevenly
distributed into daughter cells during cell division: Some cells may inherit more
mitochondria in which the normal DNA sequence predominates, while others
inherit mostly mitochondria with the mutated, disease causing gene. This condi
tion is known as heteroplasmy. Variations in heteroplasmy account for substantial
variation in the severity of expression of mitochondrial diseases.
NOTE
Mitochondrial Diseases
• Leber hereditary optic neuropathy
• MELAS: mitochondrial
encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis,
and stroke like episodes
• Myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red
Figure II 1 12. Pedigree for a Mitochondrial Disease
Figure II 1 12. Pedigree for a Mitochondrial Disease
muscle fibers
30
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
IMPORTANT PRINCIPLES THAT CAN CHARACTERIzE
SINGLE GENE DISEASES
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Variable Expression
HEMOCHROMATOSIS
Mary B. is a 45 year old white female with hip pain of 2 years’ duration. She
also experiences moderate chronic fatigue. Routine blood work shows that
liver function tests (LFTs) are slightly elevated. She does not drink alcohol. She
takes no prescription drugs although she does use aspirin for the hip pain. She
takes no vitamin or mineral supplements.
Mary B.’s 48 year old brother has recently been diagnosed with hereditary
hemochromatosis. Her brother’s symptoms include arthritis for which he takes
Tylenol (acetaminophen), significant hepatomegaly, diabetes, and “bronze” skin.
His transferrin saturation is 75% and ferritin 1300 ng/mL. A liver biopsy revealed
stainable iron in all hepatocytes and initial indications of hepatic cirrhosis.
He was found to be homozygous for the most common mutation (C282Y)
causing hemochromatosis. Subsequently Mary was tested and also proved to be
homozygous for the C282Y mutation. Following diagnosis, both individuals were
treated with periodic phlebotomy to satisfactorily reduce iron load.
Most genetic diseases vary in the degree of phenotypic expression: Some individu
als may be severely affected, whereas others are more mildly affected. This can be
the result of several factors.
Environmental Influences. In the case of hemochromatosis described above,
Mary’s less severe phenotype may in part be attributable to loss of blood during
regular menses throughout adulthood. Her brother’s use of Tylenol may contribute
to his liver problems.
The autosomal recessive disease xeroderma pigmentosum will be expressed more
severely in individuals who are exposed more frequently to ultraviolet radiation.
Allelic Heterogeneity. Different mutations in the disease causing locus may cause
more or less severe expression. Most genetic diseases show some degree of allelic
heterogeneity. For example, missense mutations in the factor VIII gene tend to
produce less severe hemophilia than do nonsense mutations, which result in a
truncated protein product and little, if any, expression of factor VIII.
Allelic heterogeneity usually results in phenotypic variation between families, not
within a single family. Generally the same mutation is responsible for all cases of
the disease within a family. In the example of hemochromatosis above, both Mary
and her brother have inherited the same mutation; thus, allelic heterogeneity is not
responsible for the variable expression in this case.
It is relatively uncommon to see a genetic disease in which there is no allelic
heterogeneity.
Heteroplasmy in mitochondrial pedigrees.
Modifier Loci. Disease expression may be affected by the action of other loci,
termed modifier loci. Often these may not be identified.
30
MY MY
LY CHAPTER 1 | SINGLYLE GENE DISORDERS
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Incomplete Penetrance
A disease causing mutation is said to have incomplete penetrance MEDIUMwhen YsIoEmLeD MEDIUM YIELD
individuals who have the disease genotype (e.g., one copy of the mutation for an
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
autosomal dominant disease or two copies for an autosomal recessive disease) do
not display the disease phenotype. Incomplete penetrance is distinguished from
variable expression in that the nonpenetrant gene has no phenotypic expression at
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTAL
all. In the pedigree shown below, individual II 4 must have the disease causing
allele (he passed it from his father to his son) but shows no symptomsR.EINFORCEMHEeNTis an REINFORCEMENT
example of nonpenetrance.
I
II
III
The unaffected male in generation II (II 4) has an
affected father and two affected sons. He must have
the disease causing mutation, although it shows
incomplete penetrance.
Figure II 1 13. Incomplete Penetrance for an Autosomal Dominant Disease
Figure II 1 13. Incomplete Penetrance for an Autosomal Dominant Disease
The penetrance of a disease causing mutation is quantified by examining a large
number of families and calculating the percentage of individuals who are known
to have the disease causing genotype who display the disease phenotype.
Suppose that we had data from several different family studies of the disease
affecting the family above and had identified 50 individuals with the disease pro
ducing genotype. Of these individuals only 40 had any symptom(s). Penetrance
would be calculated as:
40/50 = 0.80, or 80%
Penetrance must be taken into account when predicting recurrence risks. For in
stance, if II 1 and II 2 have another child, the recurrence risk is:
0.50 × 0.80 = 0.40, or 40%
Both dominant diseases and recessive diseases can show incomplete (reduced)
penetrance.
• Although 1 in 300 whites inherits the homozygous genotype for hemo
chromatosis, a much smaller percentage of individuals develop the disease
(approximately 1 in 1,000–2,000). Penetrance for this autosomal recessive
disease is only about 15%.
Notice that hereditary hemochromatosis is an example of incomplete penetrance
and also an example of variable expression. Expression of the disease phenotype in
individuals homozygous for the disease causing mutation can run the gamut from
severe symptoms to none at all. Among the 15% of individuals with at least some
phenotypic expression, that expression can be more or less severe (variable
309
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
expression). However, 85% of individuals homozygous for the disease causing
mutation never have any symptoms (nonpenetrance). The same factors that
contribute to variable expression in hemochromatosis can also contribute to
incomplete penetrance.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
It is necessary to be able to:
• Define incomplete (reduced) penetrance.
• Identify an example of incomplete penetrance in an autosomal dominant
pedigree as shown in Figure II 1 13.
• Include penetrance in a simple recurrence risk calculation.
Incomplete Penetrance in Familial Cancer. Retinoblastoma is an autosomal
dominant condition caused by an inherited loss of function mutation in the Rb
tumor suppressor gene. In 10% of individuals who inherit this mutation, there is
no additional somatic mutation in the normal copy and retinoblastoma does not
develop, although they can pass the mutation to their offspring. Penetrance of
retinoblastoma is therefore 90%.
Pleiotropy
Pleiotropy exists when a single disease causing mutation affects multiple organ
systems. Pleiotropy is a common feature of genetic diseases.
PLEIOTROPY IN MARFAN SYNDROME
Marfan syndrome is an autosomal dominant disease that affects
approximately 1 in 10,000 individuals. It is characterized by skeletal
abnormalities (thin, elongated limbs; pectus excavatum; pectus carinatum),
hypermobile joints, ocular abnormalities (frequent myopia and detached lens),
and most importantly, cardiovascular disease (mitral valve prolapse and aortic
aneurysm). Dilatation of the ascending aorta is seen in 90% of patients and
frequently leads to aortic rupture or congestive heart failure. Although the
features of this disease seem rather disparate, they are all caused by a mutation
in the gene that encodes fibrillin, a key component of connective tissue.
Fibrillin is expressed in the periosteum and perichondrium, the suspensory
ligament of the eye, and the aorta. Defective fibrillin causes the connective
tissue to be “stretchy” and leads to all of the observed disease features. Marfan
syndrome thus provides a good example of the principle of pleiotropy.
Locus Heterogeneity
Locus heterogeneity exists when the same disease phenotype can be caused by
mutations in different loci. Locus heterogeneity becomes especially important
when genetic testing is performed by testing for mutations at specific loci.
31
CHAPTER 1 | SINGLE GENE DISORDERS
LOCUS HETEROGENEITY IN OSTEOGENESIS IMPERFECTA TYPE 2
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a disease of bone development that affects
approximately 1 in 10,000 individuals. It results from a defect in the collagen
protein, a major component of the bone matrix. Four types of OI have been
identified.
Type 2, the severe perinatal type, is the result of a defect in type 1 collagen,
a trimeric molecule that has a triple helix structure. Two members of the
trimer are encoded by a gene on chromosome 17, and the third is encoded
by a gene on chromosome 7. Mutations in either of these genes give rise to a
faulty collagen molecule, causing type 2 OI. Often, patients with chromosome
17 mutations are clinically indistinguishable from those with chromosome 7
mutations. This exemplifies the principle of locus heterogeneity.
New Mutations
In many genetic diseases, particularly those in which the mortality rate is high or
the fertility rate is low, a large proportion of cases are caused by a new mutation
transmitted from an unaffected parent to an affected offspring. There is thus no
family history of the disease (for example, 100% of individuals with osteogenesis
imperfecta type 2, discussed above, are the result of a new mutation in the family).
A pedigree in which there has been a new mutation is shown in Figure II I 14.
Because the mutation occurred in only one parental gamete, the recurrence risk
for other offspring of the parents remains very low. However, the recurrence risk
for future offspring of the affected individual would be the same as that of any
individual who has inherited the disease causing mutation.
New
mutation
Figure IIFig1ure14. II P1ed1ig4r.eePedigree withwith aa NNeeww MutMatiuotnation
Delayed Age of Onset
Many individuals who carry a disease causing mutation do not manifest the
phenotype until later in life. This can complicate the interpretation of a pedigree
because it may be difficult to distinguish genetically normal individuals from those
who have inherited the mutation but have not yet displayed the phenotype.
31
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
CLINICAL CORRELATE DELAYED AGE OF ONSET IN HUNTINGTON DISEASE
Diseases with Delayed Age of Onset
Huntington disease, an autosomal dominant condition, affects approximately
• Acute intermittent porphyria 1 in 20,000 individuals. Features of the disease include progressive dementia,
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
(peri or postpubertal) loss of motor control, and affective disorder. This is a slowly progressing
disease, with an average duration of approximately 15 years. Common causes
• Huntington disease
of death include aspiration pneumonia, head trauma (resulting from loss of
• Hemochromatosis motor control), and suicide. Most patients first develop symptoms in their 30s
or 40s, so this is a good example of a disease with delayed age of onset. The
• Familial breast cancer
mutation produces a buildup of toxic protein aggregates in neurons, eventually
resulting in neuronal death.
Anticipation
Anticipation refers to a pattern of inheritance in which individuals in the most
recent generations of a pedigree develop a disease at an earlier age or with greater
severity than do those in earlier generations. For a number of genetic diseases, this
phenomenon can be attributed to the gradual expansion of trinucleotide repeat
polymorphisms within or near a coding gene.
Huntington disease was cited above as an example of delayed age of onset; it is also
a good example of anticipation.
The condition results from a gain of function mutation on chromosome 4 and is
an example of a trinucleotide repeat expansion disorder. Normal huntingtin genes
have fewer than 27 CAG repeats in the 5′ coding region, and the number is stable
from generation to generation. In families who eventually present with Hunting
ton disease, premutations of 27–35 repeats are seen, although these individuals do
not have Huntington disease. Some of these individuals (generally males) may
then transmit an expanded number of repeats to their offspring. Individuals with
more than 39 repeats are then seen, and these individuals develop symptoms.
Within this group, age of onset is correlated with the number of repeats and ranges
from a median age 66 (39 repeats) to age <20 (more than 70 repeats).
The figure below illustrates anticipation in a family with Huntington disease. The
ages of onset for the affected individuals are shown along with the number of CAG
repeats (in parentheses).
31
CHAPTER 1 | SINGLE GENE DISORDERS
65 (37)
53 (39) 55 (40)
40 (44)
Numbers under pedigree symbols identify
age of onset (CAG repeats).
Figure II 1 15. Anticipation for Huntington Disease,
Figure II 1 15. Anticipation for Huntington Disease,
an Autosomal Dominant Disorder
an Autosomal Dominant Disorder
Table II 1 1. Diseases Showing Anticipation Associated with Triplet Repeat Expansions
Disease Symptoms Repeat
Huntington disease Movement abnormality
CAG 5′
(autosomal dominant) Emotional disturbance coding
Cognitive impairment
Death 10–15 years after onset
Fragile X syndrome Intellectual disability CGG 5′ UTR
(X dominant)
Large ears and jaw
Post pubertal macro orchidism
(males)
Attention deficit disorder (in
females)
Myotonic dystrophy Muscle loss CTG 3′ UTR
(autosomal dominant)
Cardiac arrhythmia
Testicular atrophy
Frontal baldness
Cataracts
Friedreich ataxia Early onset progressive gait and GAA
(autosomal recessive) limb ataxia Intron 1
Areflexia in all 4 limbs
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Axonal sensory neuropathy
Kyphoscoliosis
31
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Friedreich Ataxia
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences A 16 year old girl is seen by her neurologist for increasing weakness in her
arms. She was apparently normal at birth, began walking at age 13 months,
and had normal development until age 6. At that time her parents noted
increasing clumsiness and stumbling. After undergoing neurologic testing,
she was diagnosed with Friedreich ataxia. She began using a wheelchair at
age 8 and currently cannot stand or walk unaided. She has now developed
hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy. She is breathless upon exertion
but not at rest. She has kyphoscoliosis that has been progressive since age
12 but does not impair her breathing. Deep tendon reflexes are absent and
there was an extensor plantar response bilaterally.
Friedreich ataxia is caused by expansion of a GAA repeat in the frataxin
gene and is an autosomal recessive condition. Average life expectancy is
approximately age 40, but can vary significantly.
Recall Question
Which of the following terms describes the occurrence of multiple
organ systems being involved by a single disease causing mutation?
A. Incomplete penetrance
B. Locus heterogeneity
C. Pleiotropy HY
D. Variable expression MY
LY
Answer: C
High Yield H
Imprinting
Imprinting refers to the fact that a small number of genes are trManEsDcrIiUptMionally YIELD ME
active only when transmitted by one of the two sexes. The homologous locus in the
LOW YIELD
other parent is rendered transcriptionally inactive. Thus, for imprinted loci, it is
normal to have only the maternal (for some loci) active, or only the paternal (for
other loci) active.
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
Imprinting:
REINFORCEMENT RE
• Occurs during gametogenesis.
• Is maintained in all somatic cells of the offspring.
• During gametogenesis in the offspring, is erased and re established
according to the sex of the individual.
• Involves methylation and possibly other mechanisms to imprint or
inactivate the appropriate loci.
• Occurs in specific loci on several chromosomes.
31
CHAPTER 1 | SINGLE GENE DISORDERS
Prader Willi and Angelman Syndromes. On rare occasion, the transcriptionally
active gene may be deleted from the chromosome (perhaps by unequal cross
over) during gametogenesis. This leaves the offspring with no active gene at that
locus. The gene from one parent is inactivated due to normal imprinting, and the
gene from the other parent deleted by a mutation. This situation may result in a
genetic disease.
PRADER WILL SYNDROME
A 3 year old boy is evaluated for obesity. At birth he fed poorly and was
somewhat hypotonic and lethargic. At that time he was diagnosed with
failure to thrive, cause unknown, and was given intragastric feedings until he
regained his birth weight. He continued to gain weight slowly but remained in
the lowest quartile for age appropriate weight and height. Walking was delayed
until he was age 26 months. Over the last year his appetite has increased
dramatically. He has begun having temper tantrums of increasing frequency
and violence, causing his withdrawal from preschool. His current evaluation
reveals an obese boy with mental and developmental delay. The physician also
notes underdeveloped genitalia, and she refers the boy to a genetics clinic for
karyotype analysis. The result shows a deletion from one copy of chromosome
15q11 q13 consistent with Prader Willi syndrome.
Prader Willi syndrome is caused by loss from the paternal chromosome of an
imprinted locus mapping to 15q11 13 that includes the gene SNRPN. This gene,
normally active from the paternal copy of chromosome 15, encodes a component
of mRNA splicing.
Interestingly, a different genetic disease—Angelman syndrome—is produced if
there is a deletion of 15q11 13 from the maternal chromosome. In this case the
locus imprinted in the maternal chromosome includes a gene involved in the
ubiquitin pathway known as UBE3A, for which the maternal gene is normally
expressed while the paternal gene is silenced. This has led to the conclusion that
there are at least 2 imprinted genes within this region, one active on the
paternal chromosome 15 and the other normally active on the maternal
chromosome 15. Loss, usually by deletion of paternal 15q11 13, causes Prader
Willi, whereas loss of the maternal 15q11 13 causes Angelman syndrome (see
margin notes on next page).
Uniparental Disomy
Uniparental disomy is a rare condition in which both copies of a particular
chromosome are contributed by one parent. This may cause problems if the
chromosome contains an imprinted region or a mutation. For example, 25–30% of
Prader Willi cases are caused by maternal uniparental disomy of chromosome 15.
A smaller percentage of Angelman syndrome is caused by paternal uniparental
disomy of chromosome 15.
31
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
CLINICAL CORRELATE
Chromosome 15 Pair in Normal Child
Prader Willi Syndrome
• Affects males and females
BehavioralScience/SocialSci•enceNseonatal hypotonia
• Poor feeding in neonatal period
15q
• Behavior problems
• Moderate intellectual disability and
developmental retardation Normally Normally
imprinted in imprinted in
• Hypogonadism, underdeveloped paternal 15 maternal 1
genitalia
A.
• Hyperphagia (overeating) and obesity
by ages 2–4 years
Chromosome 15 Pair in Child
• Small hands and feet with Prader Willi
• Deletion from paternal 15q
• Very low recurrence risk
Deletion in
paternal
chromosome 15: 15q
Prader Willi
CLINICAL CORRELATE Normally Normally
Angelman Syndrome imprinted in imprinted in
• Affects males and females paternal 15 maternal 15
• Severe intellectual disability B.
• Seizures
Chromosome 15 Pair in Child
• Ataxia
with Angelman Syndrome
• Puppet like posture of limbs
• Happy disposition
Normally
• Deletion from maternal 15q
imprinted in
15q
• Very low recurrence risk maternal 15
Deletion in
Normally
maternal
imprinted in
chromosome 15:
paternal 15
Angelman
C.
A. Loci normally imprinted on chromosome 15
B. Deletion causing Prader Willi syndrome
C. Deletion causing Angelman syndrome
Figure II 1 16. Prader Willi and Angelman Syndromes:
Figure II 1 16. Prader Willi and Angelman Syndromes:
Diseases Involving Imprinted Loci
Diseases Involving Imprinted Loci
316
CHAPTER 1 | SINGLE GENE DISORDERS
Review Questions
1. A 25 year old woman has mild expression of hemophilia A. A genetic diag
nosis reveals that she is a heterozygous carrier of a mutation in the X linked
factor VIII gene. What is the most likely explanation for mild expression of
the disease in this individual?
A. A high proportion of the X chromosomes carrying the mutation are
active in this woman
B. Her father is affected, and her mother is a heterozygous carrier
C. Nonsense mutation causing truncated protein
D. One of her X chromosomes carries the SRY gene
E. X inactivation does not affect the entire chromosome
2. A 20 year old man has had no retinoblastomas but has produced two
offspring with multiple retinoblastomas. In addition, his father had two ret
inoblastomas as a young child, and one of his siblings has had 3 retinoblas
tomas. What is the most likely explanation for the absence of retinoblasto
mas in this individual?
A. A new mutation in the unaffected individual, which has corrected the
disease causing mutation
B. Highly variable expression of the disorder
C. Incomplete penetrance
D. Multiple new mutations in other family members
E. Pleiotropy
3. A 30 year old man is phenotypically normal, but two of his siblings died
from infantile Tay Sachs disease, an autosomal recessive condition that is
lethal by the age of 5. What is the risk that this man is a heterozygous
carrier of the disease causing mutation?
A. 1/4
B. 1/2
C. 2/3
D. 3/4
E. Not elevated above that of the general population
4. A large, 3 generation family in whom multiple members are affected with a
rare, undiagnosed disease is being studied. Affected males never produce
affected children, but affected females do produce affected children of both
sexes when they mate with unaffected males. What is the most likely mode
of inheritance?
A. Autosomal dominant, with expression limited to females
B. Y linked
C. Mitochondrial
D. X linked dominant
E. X linked recessive
31
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
5. A man who is affected with hemophilia A (X linked recessive) mates with a
woman who is a heterozygous carrier of this disorder. What proportion of
this couple’s daughters will be affected, and what proportion of the daugh
ters will be heterozygous carriers?
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
A. 0%; 50%
B. 100%; 0%
C. 0%; 100%
D. 50%; 50%
E. 2/3; 1/3
6. The clinical progression of Becker muscular dystrophy is typically much
slower than that of Duchenne muscular dystrophy. This is usually the
result of
A. gain of function mutations in the Duchenne form; loss of function
mutations in the Becker form
B. in frame deletions or insertions in the Becker form; frameshift deletions
or insertions in the Duchenne form
C. mis sense mutations in the Becker form; nonsense mutations in the
Duchenne form
D. mutations at two distinct loci for these two forms of muscular dystrophy
E. nonsense mutations in the Becker form; missense mutations in the
Duchenne form
7. A 10 year old girl is diagnosed with Marfan syndrome, an autosomal domi
nant condition. An extensive review of her pedigree indicates no previous
family history of this disorder. The most likely explanation for this pattern is
A. highly variable expression of the disease phenotype
B. incomplete penetrance
C. mitochondrial compensation in the mother
D. new mutation transmitted by one of the parents to the affected girl
E. pleiotropy
8. In assessing a patient with osteogenesis imperfecta, a history of bone frac
tures, as well as blue sclerae, are noted. These findings are an example of
A. allelic heterogeneity
B. gain of function mutation
C. locus heterogeneity
D. multiple mutations
E. pleiotropy
31
CHAPTER 1 | SINGLE GENE DISORDERS
9. In studying a large number of families with a small deletion in a specific
chromosome region, it is noted that the disease phenotype is distinctly dif
ferent when the deletion is inherited from the mother as opposed to the
father. What is the most likely explanation?
A. Imprinting
B. Mitochondrial inheritance
C. Sex dependent penetrance
D. X linked dominant inheritance
E. X linked recessive inheritance
10. A man and woman are both affected by an autosomal dominant disorder
that has 80% penetrance. They are both heterozygotes for the disease
causing mutation. What is the probability that they will produce phenotypi
cally normal offspring?
A. 20%
B. 25%
C. 40%
D. 60%
E. 80%
11. The severe form of alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency is the result of a single
nucleotide substitution that produces a single amino acid substitution. This
is best described as a
A. Frameshift mutation
B. In frame mutation
C. Missense mutation
D. Nonsense mutation
E. Splice site mutation
12. Waardenburg syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder in which
patients may exhibit a variety of clinical features, including patches of pre
maturely grey hair, white eyelashes, a broad nasal root, and moderate to
severe hearing impairment. Occasionally, affected individuals display two
eyes of different colors and a cleft lip and/or palate. Patients who possess a
mutation in the PAX3 gene on chromosome 2 can present with all of these
disparate signs and symptoms. Which of the following characteristics of
genetic traits is illustrated by this example?
A. Anticipation
B. Imprinting
C. Incomplete penetrance
D. Locus heterogeneity
E. Pleiotropy
31
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
Answers
1. Answer: A. The most likely explanation for mild expression in a heterozy
gous carrier is that when X inactivation occurred in the affected individual,
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences the random process happened to inactivate most of the X chromosomes
that carried the normal version of the factor VIII gene. Thus, most of the
active X chromosomes in this individual would carry the mutation and
would not produce factor VIII, leading to a clinically expressed deficiency.
If the woman’s father is affected and her mother is a carrier (choice B), she
has a 50% chance of being an affected homozygote, but her expression is
more likely to be severe.
A nonsense mutation (choice C) is likely to produce severe expression if it
is inherited from both the mother and the father.
The SRY gene (choice D) is involved in sex determination and would not
affect factor VIII expression.
Although it is true that X inactivation does not affect the entire X chromo
some (choice E), it consistently affects the factor VIII gene and thus could
not explain the status of this woman.
2. Answer: C. Because multiple family members are affected and because
mutations at the retinoblastoma gene are known to be sometimes nonpene
trant, the man in question is most likely an obligate carrier of the mutation
who did not experience a second mutation in this gene during his fetal
development.
A new mutation correcting the defect could occur (choice A), but then the
man’s two sons would both have experienced new mutations. The combina
tion of 3 mutations affecting 3 different individuals in the family is highly
unlikely.
Variable expression (choice B) refers to differences in the severity of a dis
order but does not refer to the complete absence of the disorder, which is
incomplete penetrance.
The number of affected individuals in this family (4) makes multiple new
mutations in so many individuals extremely unlikely (choice D). Remember
that inherited mutations are rare events.
Pleiotropy is observed in retinoblastoma (choice E), in that mutation carri
ers can develop other cancers, such as osteosarcoma. This, however, does
not explain the lack of a tumor in the 20 year old man.
3. Answer: C. Because two of the man’s siblings had Tay Sachs disease, his
parents must both be carriers. This clearly elevates his risk above the gener
al population and excludes choice E. He is not affected, so this excludes
choice A, which is the probability of inheriting two copies of the disease
allele. His risk of inheriting one copy of the disease gene at conception is
1/2 (choice B). However, the fact that he is phenotypically normal at age 30
means that he cannot have inherited copies of the disease gene from both
parents. Only 3 possibilities remain: Either he inherited no copies of the
mutation, he inherited a copy from his father, or he inherited a copy from
his mother. Each of these possibilities is equally likely, and two of them lead
to heterozygosity. Thus, the risk that he is a carrier is 2/3.
32
CHAPTER 1 | SINGLE GENE DISORDERS
4. Answer: C. This is a pattern expected of mitochondrial inheritance because
only females transmit mitochondrial DNA to their offspring. Thus, an
affected female can transmit the mutation to her offspring of both sexes,
but an affected male cannot transmit it.
Choice A is excluded because, although the disease is not transmitted by
males, it is seen in them.
Under Y linked inheritance (choice B), affected males would transmit the
mutation and would transmit it only to their sons.
X linked dominant inheritance (choice D) is excluded because affected
males can transmit X linked dominant mutations to their daughters.
X linked recessive inheritance (choice E) could explain this pattern because
affected males typically produce only heterozygous carrier daughters and
unaffected sons (unless they mate with a carrier female). However, affected
homozygous females, who will produce affected sons, would produce an
affected daughter only if they mated with an affected male.
5. Answer: D. Because the man transmits his X chromosome to all of his
daughters, all of the daughters must carry at least one copy of the mutation.
The mother will transmit a mutation carrying X chromosome half the time
and a normal X chromosome half the time. Thus, half of the daughters will
be heterozygous carriers, and half will be affected homozygotes, having
received a mutation from both parents.
6. Answer: B. In frame deletions or insertions typically produce an altered
protein product (dystrophin), but the alteration is mild enough so that
Becker muscular dystrophy results. Frame shifts usually produce a truncat
ed protein because a stop codon is eventually encountered. The truncated
protein is degraded, resulting in an absence of dystrophin and a more
severe disease phenotype.
Both types of muscular dystrophy are X linked recessive mutations, making
a gain of function highly unlikely for either type (choice A).
Because approximately 2/3 of all mutations leading to these diseases are
insertions or deletions, differences in single base mutations (i.e., missense
or nonsense mutations) would not be the most likely explanation, excluding
choice C and choice E.
These two forms of muscular dystrophy are known to be encoded by the
same locus, so locus heterogeneity (choice D) is excluded.
7. Answer: D. For an autosomal dominant condition, the first occurrence in a
family is usually the result of a new mutation that occurred in one of the
gametes transmitted by a parent of the affected individual.
Although variable expression (choice A) is a characteristic of this disease,
other family members (including a parent) would be likely to manifest at
least mild expression of the disorder.
The penetrance of Marfan mutations is high, so it is highly unlikely that all
other gene carriers in the family would be nonpenetrant carriers (choice B).
Mitochondrial genes are not known to affect the expression of Marfan syn
drome (choice C).
32
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
Marfan syndrome is an excellent example of pleiotropy (choice E), but this
principle refers to the fact that a single mutation can affect multiple aspects
of the phenotype, so it would not explain the pattern observed in this pedi
gree.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
8. Answer: E. Pleiotropy refers to the multiple effects exerted by a single
mutation and thus describes the two features observed in this patient.
Allelic heterogeneity is observed in osteogenesis imperfecta (choice A), but
allelic heterogeneity causes variable expression in patients and is not the
principle described here.
Osteogenesis imperfecta is a good example of a disease in which locus het
erogeneity (choice C) is observed, but this principle refers to the fact that a
mutation in either the type 1 procollagen gene on chromosome 7 or the
type 1 procollagen gene on chromosome 17 can result in imperfect forma
tion of the trimeric protein. This principle does not explain the
co occurrence of fractures and blue sclerae.
A single mutation at either the chromosome 7 or chromosome 17 locus is
sufficient to cause the disease, so multiple mutations (choice D) do not
explain the pattern.
9. Answer: A. Imprinting refers to the differential transcriptional activity of
genes inherited from the father versus the mother.
Under mitochondrial inheritance (choice B), only an affected mother can
transmit the disease phenotype; the offspring of affected males are always
unaffected.
The other modes of inheritance can influence the relative proportions of
affected individuals who belong to one gender or the other (e.g., more
affected males under X linked recessive inheritance, more affected females
under X linked dominant inheritance), but they do not involve any differ
ences in expression depending on the transmitting parent.
10. Answer: C. If both parents are heterozygotes, there is a 75% chance that
their offspring will receive one or two copies of the disease causing gene
(i.e., a 50% chance that the offspring will receive one copy and a 25%
chance that the offspring will receive two copies). With 80% penetrance, the
probability that the offspring will be affected is 0.75 × 0.8, or 0.6 (60%). The
probability that the offspring will be phenotypically normal is 1 – 0.60, or
0.40 (40%).
11. Answer: C. A missense mutation results in the change of only a single
amino acid.
Frameshift mutations (choice A) are the result of the deletion or insertion
of a series of nucleotides that are not a multiple of 3 (thus altering the read
ing frame). Although the insertion or deletion of a single nucleotide would
produce a frameshift, it is highly unlikely that it would alter only a single
amino acid. The shift in the reading frame typically alters a number of
amino acids subsequent to the insertion or deletion site.
An in frame mutation (choice B) is the insertion or deletion of a multiple
of 3 nucleotides, so this single nucleotide substitution cannot be an
in frame mutation.
32
CHAPTER 1 | SINGLE GENE DISORDERS
A nonsense mutation (choice D) is a single nucleotide substitution that
produces a stop codon and thus truncation of the polypeptide. Therefore, it
typically alters more than a single amino acid.
Splice site mutations (choice E) occur at intron exon boundaries and typi
cally result in the loss of an exon or the inclusion of part of an intron in the
coding sequence. Thus, more than a single amino acid would be altered in a
typical splice site mutation.
12. Answer: E. Pleiotropy refers to the appearance of apparently unrelated
characteristics resulting from a single genetic defect. It is often the result of
the presence of a single altered molecule in multiple locations in the body,
so that the single mutation has effects in multiple organ systems. In Marfan
syndrome, for example, a defect in the fibrillin gene causes manifestations
of the disease in the eye, aorta, and joints.
Anticipation (choice A) describes the finding that in some pedigrees, a dis
ease trait occurs in earlier and earlier age groups as the generations prog
ress. It is often a finding in pedigrees in which trinucleotide repeat expan
sions are linked to disease expression.
Imprinting (choice B) refers to the selective inactivation of a gene in one of
the parental sexes during gametogenesis. Males and females inactivate dif
ferent regions on several autosomal chromosomes, so that the maternal or
paternal source of such a chromosome may have different results in the
progeny.
Incomplete penetrance (choice C) indicates that a certain fraction of indi
viduals with a disease producing genotype develop no symptoms. An
example is hemochromatosis in which 1/300 people in the United States
have the disease producing genotype, but only about 1/2,000 ever show
symptoms of the disease.
Locus heterogeneity (choice D) refers to the case in which a mutation in
any one of several distinct genetic loci can result in a single disease pheno
type. It is common in cases where a single molecule is composed of multi
ple subunits. The alteration of any one of the subunits results in the forma
tion of a molecule with altered function; thus, several different mutations
can yield the same phenotypic result.
32

2#
Population Genetics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Solve problems concerning genotype and allele frequencies
❏ Know how to apply the Hardy Weinberg equilibrium
❏ Interpret scenarios about factors responsible for genetic variation in/
among populations
DEFINITION
Population genetics is the study of genetic variation in populations. Basic concepts
of population genetics allow us to understand how and why the prevalence of
various genetic diseases differs among populations.
GENOTYPE AND ALLELE FREQUENCIES
An essential step in understanding genetic variation is to measure it in popula
tions. This is done by estimating genotype and allele frequencies.
Genotype Frequencies
For a given locus, the genotype frequency measures the proportion of each
genotype in a population. Suppose that a population of 100 individuals has been
assayed for an autosomal restriction fragment length polymorphism. If the
RFLP has 2 possible alleles, labeled 1 and 2, there are 3 possible genotypes: 1 1,
1 2, and 2 2.
Visualization of a Southern blot allows us to determine the genotype of each
individual in our population, and we find that the genotypes are distributed as
follows:
Table II 2 1. Genotype Frequency
Genotype Count Genotype Frequency
1 1 49 0.49
1 2 42 0.42
2 2 9 0.09
Total 100 1.00
32
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
The genotype frequency is then obtained by dividing the count for each
genotype by the total number of individuals. Thus, the frequency of genotype
1 1 is 49/100 = 0.49, and the frequencies of genotypes 1 2 and 2 2 are 0.42 and
0.09, respectively.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Allele Frequencies
The allele frequency measures the proportion of chromosomes that contain a specific
allele. To continue the earlier RFLP example, we wish to estimate the frequencies of
alleles 1 and 2 in our population. Each individual with the 1 1 genotype has 2 copies
of allele 1, and each heterozygote (1 2 genotype) has one copy of allele 1. Because each
diploid somatic cell contains 2 copies of each autosome, our denominator is 200.
Thus, the frequency of allele 1 in the population is:
_(2____×____4_9_)_ + 42
= 0.7
200
The same approach can be used to estimate the frequency of allele 2, which
NOTE
is 0.3. A convenient shortcut is to remember that the allele frequencies for all
Genotype frequencies measure the
of the alleles of a given locus must add up to 1. Therefore, we can obtain the
proportion of each genotype in a population. frequency of allele 2 simply by subtracting the frequency of allele 1 (0.7) from 1.
Allele frequencies measure the proportion of
chromosomes that contain a specific allele
(of a gene).
HARDY WEINBERG EQUILIBRIUM
If a population is large and if individuals mate at random with respect to their
genotypes at a locus, the population should be in Hardy Weinberg equilibrium.
This means that there is a constant and predictable relationship between genotype
frequencies and allele frequencies. This relationship, expressed in the
Hardy Weinberg equation, allows one to estimate genotype frequencies if one
knows allele frequencies, and vice versa.
The Hardy Weinberg Equation
p2 + 2pq + q2 = 1
In this equation:
p = frequency of allele 1 (conventionally the most common, normal allele)
q = frequency of allele 2 (conventionally a minor, disease producing allele)
p2 = frequency of genotype 1 1 (conventionally homozygous normal)
2pq = frequency of genotype 1 2 (conventionally heterozygous)
q2 = frequency of genotype 2 2 (conventionally homozygous affected)
In most cases where this equation is used, a simplification is possible. Generally p,
the normal allele frequency in the population, is very close to 1 (e.g., most of the
alleles of this gene are normal). In this case, we may assume that p ~ 1, and the
equation simplifies to:
1 + 2q + q2 ~ 1
32
CHAPTER 2 | POPULATION GENETICS
The frequency of the disease producing allele in question, q, is a very small
fraction. This simplification would not necessarily be used in actual medical
genetics practice, but for answering test questions, it works quite well. However, if
the disease prevalence >1/100, e.g., q >1/10, the complete Hardy Weinberg
equation should be used to obtain an accurate answer. In this case, p = 1 - q.
Although the Hardy Weinberg equation applies equally well to autosomal
dominant and recessive alleles, genotypes, and diseases, the equation is most
HY HY
frequently used with autosomal recessive conditions. In these instances, a large
percentage of the disease producing allele is “hidden” in heterozygous carriersMY MY
who cannot be distinguished phenotypically (clinically) from homozygous
normal individuals. LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Practical Application of Hardy Weinberg
A simple example is illustrated by the following case. MEDIUM YIELD MEDIUM YIELD
A20 year old college student is taking a course in human genetics. ShLeOWis YIELD LOW YIELD
aware that she has an autosomal recessive genetic disease that has required
her lifelong adherence to a diet low in natural protein with supplements of
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
tyrosine and restricted amounts of phenylalanine. She also must avoid foods
NOTE
artificially sweetened with aspartame (NutraSweetTM). She asks hRerEINFgOenReCticEsMENT REINFORCEMENT
Hardy Weinberg Equilibrium in
professor about the chances that she would marry a man with the disease
Phenylketonuria (PKU)
producing allele.
• Prevalence of PKU is 1/10,000 live
The geneticist tells her that the known prevalence of PKU in the population is
1/10,000 live births, but the frequency of carriers is much higher, approximately births
1/50. Her greatest risk comes from marrying a carrier for two reasons. First, the
• Allele frequency =
frequency of carriers for this condition is much higher than the frequency of
(1/10,000) = 1/100 = 0.01
affected homozygotes, and second, an affected person would be identifiable
clinically. The geneticist used the Hardy Weinberg equation to estimate the
• Carrier frequency = 2(1/100) =
carrier frequency from the known prevalence of the disease in the following
1/50
way:
Disease prevalence = q2 = 1/10,000 live births
Carrier frequency = 2q (to be calculated)
q = square root of 1/10,000, which is 1/100
2q = 2/100, or 1/50, the carrier frequency
BRIDGE TO STATISTICS
The woman now asks a second question: “Knowing that Ihave a 1/50 chance of
marrying a carrier of this allele, what is the probability that Iwill have a child with If events are nonindependent, multiply the
PKU?” probability of one event by the probability of
The geneticist answers, “The chance of you having a child with PKU is 1/100.” This the second event, assuming that the first
answer is based on the joint occurrence of two nonindependent events: has occurred.
• The probability that she will marry a heterozygous carrier (1/50), and For example, what is the probability that the
student’s husband will pass the disease
• If he is a carrier, the probability that he will pass his PKU allele versus the
normal allele to the child (1/2). producing allele to the child? It is the
probability that he will be a carrier (1/50,
These probabilities would be multiplied to give:
event 1) multiplied by the probability that he
• 1/50 × 1/2 = 1/100, the probability that she will have a child with PKU. will pass the disease causing gene along
(1/2, event 2), assuming he is a carrier.
32
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
NOTE In summary, there are 3 major terms one usually works with in the Hardy Weinberg
equation applied to autosomal recessive conditions:
Assuming random mating, the Hardy
Weinberg principle specifies a predictable • q2, the disease prevalence
BehavioralScience/SocrieallaSticoiennshceips between allele frequencies and
• 2q, the carrier frequency
genotype frequencies in populations. This
• q, the frequency of the disease causing allele
principle can be applied to estimate the
frequency of heterozygous carriers of an When answering questions involving Hardy Weinberg calculations, it is important
autosomal recessive mutation. to identify which of these terms has been given in the stem of the question and
which term you are asked to calculate.
This exercise demonstrates two important points:
• The Hardy Weinberg principle can be applied to estimate the prevalence
of heterozygous carriers in populations when we know only the prevalence
of the recessive disease.
• For autosomal recessive diseases, such as PKU, the prevalence of heterozy
gous carriers is much higher than the prevalence of affected homozygotes.
In effect, the vast majority of recessive genes are hidden in the heterozy
gotes.
Hardy Weinberg Equilibrium for Dominant Diseases
The calculations for dominant diseases must acknowledge that most of the affected
individuals will be heterozygous. In this case, the prevalence is 2q. (One can again
use the assumption that p ~ 1.) The term q2 represents the prevalence of homozy
gous affected individuals who, although much less commonly seen, may have more
severe symptoms. For example,
• 1/500 people in the United States have a form of LDL receptor deficiency
and are at increased risk for cardiovascular disease and myocardial
infarction.
• Taking 2q = 1/500, one can calculate that q2 = 1/106, or one in a
million live births are homozygous for the condition. These individuals
have greatly elevated LDL cholesterol levels, a much higher risk for
cardiovascular disease than heterozygotes, and are more likely to
present with characteristic xanthomas, xanthelasmas, and corneal
arcus.
In contrast, in Huntington disease (autosomal dominant), the number of triplet
repeats correlates much more strongly with disease severity than does heterozy
gous or homozygous status.
Sex Chromosomes and Allele Frequencies
When considering X linked recessive conditions, one must acknowledge that most
cases occur in hemizygous males (xY). Therefore, q = disease producing allele
frequency but, paradoxically, it also equals the prevalence of affected males. Thus,
the statement “1/10,000 males has hemophilia A” also gives the allele frequency for
the disease producing allele: 1/10,000.
• q2 = prevalence of disease in females (1/108, or 1/100,000,000)
• 2q = prevalence of female carriers (1/5,000)
32
CHAPTER 2 | POPULATION GENETICS
This exercise demonstrates that:
• As with autosomal recessive traits, the majority of X linked recessive genes
are hidden in female heterozygous carriers (although a considerable
number of these genes are seen in affected males).
• X linked recessive traits are seen much more commonly in males than in
females.
FACTORS RESPONSIBLE FOR GENETIC VARIATION
IN/AMONG POPULATIONS
Although human populations are typically in Hardy Weinberg equilibrium for
most loci, deviations from equilibrium can be produced by new mutations, the
introduction of a new mutation into a population from outside (founder effect),
nonrandom mating (for example, consanguinity), the action of natural selection,
genetic drift, and gene flow. Although these factors are discussed independently,
often more than one effect contributes to allele frequencies in a population.
NOTE
Mutation
The 4 evolutionary factors responsible for
Mutation, discussed previously, is ultimately the source of all new genetic variation
genetic variation in populations are:
in populations. In general, mutation rates do not differ very much from population
to population.
• Mutation
In some cases, a new mutation can be introduced into a population when someone
• Natural selection
carrying the mutation is one of the early founders of the community. This is
referred to as a founder effect. As the community rapidly expands through • Genetic drift
generations, the frequency of the mutation can be affected by natural selection, by
• Gene flow
genetic drift (see below), and by consanguinity.
BRANCHED CHAIN KETOACID DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY
Branched chain ketoacid dehydrogenase deficiency (maple syrup urine
disease) occurs in 1/176 live births in the Mennonite community of Lancaster,
PA, while in the U.S. population at large, the disease occurs in only 1/180,000
live births. The predominance of a single mutation (allele) in the branched
chain dehydrogenase gene in this group suggests a common origin of the
mutation. This may be due to a founder effect.
Natural Selection
Natural selection acts upon genetic variation, increasing the frequencies of alleles
that promote survival or fertility (referred to as fitness) and decreasing the
frequencies of alleles that reduce fitness. The reduced fitness of most
disease producing alleles helps explain why most genetic diseases are relatively
rare. Dominant diseases, in which the disease causing allele is more readily
exposed to the effects of natural selection, tend to have lower allele frequencies
than do recessive diseases, where the allele is typically hidden in heterozygotes.
32
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
SICKLE CELL DISEASE AND MALARIA
Sickle cell disease affects 1/600 African Americans and up to 1/50 individuals
in some parts of Africa. How could this highly deleterious disease causing
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
mutation become so frequent, especially in Africa? The answer lies in the fact
that the falciparum malaria parasite, which has been common in much of
Africa, does not survive well in the erythrocytes of sickle cell heterozygotes.
These individuals, who have no clinical signs of sickle cell disease, are
thus protected against the lethal effects of malaria. Consequently, there is
a heterozygote advantage for the sickle cell mutation, and it maintains a
relatively high frequency in some African populations.
There is now evidence for heterozygote advantages for several other recessive
diseases that are relatively common in some populations. Examples include:
• Cystic fibrosis (heterozygote resistance to typhoid fever)
• Hemochromatosis (heterozygote advantage in iron poor environments)
• Glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, hemolytic anemia
(heterozygote resistance to malaria)
Genetic Drift
Mutation rates do not vary significantly from population to population, although
they can result in significant differences in allele frequencies when they occur in
small populations or are introduced by a founder effect. Mutation rates and
founder effects act along with genetic drift to make certain genetic diseases more
common (or rarer) in small, isolated populations than in the world at large.
Consider the pedigrees (very small populations) shown in Figure II 2 1.
33
CHAPTER 2 | POPULATION GENETICS
Affected person who
either founds or moves
I into the small population
(founder effect)
II
III
I New mutation in a
family
II
III
Genetic drift begins. In both examples the frequency of affected persons in
generation III is 2/3, higher than the 1/2 predicted by statistics.
Figure II F2igur1e. GIIene2tic1. GenetDicrift Drinift TiwnoTwoSmSmalalll PoPpouplautliaotniosns
(Illustrated (Illustratewdith waithDomainDanotminant DDisiseeaassee))
If the woman and the affected man (II 5) in the top panel had 1,000 children
rather than 6, the prevalence of the disease in their offspring (Generation III)
would be closer to 1/2, the statistical mean. Although genetic drift affects
populations larger than a single family, this example illustrates two points:
• When a new mutation or a founder effect occurs in a small population,
genetic drift can make the allele more or less prevalent than statistics
alone would predict.
• A relatively large population in Hardy Weinberg equilibrium for an allele
or many alleles can be affected by population “bottlenecks” in which
natural disaster or large scale genocide dramatically reduces the size of
the population. Genetic drift may then change allele frequencies and a new
Hardy Weinberg equilibrium is reached.
33
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
Gene Flow
Gene flow refers to the exchange of genes among populations. Because of gene
flow, populations located close to one another often tend to have similar gene
frequencies. Gene flow can also cause gene frequencies to change through time:
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
The frequency of sickle cell disease is lower in African Americans in part because
of gene flow from other sectors of the U.S. population that do not carry the
disease causing mutation; in addition, the heterozygote advantage for the sickle
cell mutation (see text box) has disappeared because malaria has become rare in
North America.
NOTE Consanguinity and Its Health Consequences
Consanguineous matings are more likely to Consanguinity refers to the mating of individuals who are related to one another
produce offspring affected with recessive (typically, a union is considered to be consanguineous if it occurs between
individuals related at the second cousin level or closer). Figure II 2 2 illustrates a
diseases because individuals who share
pedigree for a consanguineous union. Because of their mutual descent from
common ancestors are more liable to share
common ancestors, relatives are more likely to share the same disease causing
disease causing mutations.
genes. Statistically,
• Siblings (II 2 and II 3 or II 4) share 1/2 of their genes.
• First cousins (III 3 and III 4) share 1/8 of their genes (1/2 × 1/2 × 1/2).
• Second cousins (IV 1 and IV 2) share 1/32 of their genes (1/8 × 1/2 × 1/2).
These numbers are referred to as the coefficients of relationship. Thus, if individual
III 1 carries a disease causing allele, there is a 1/2 chance that individual III 3 (his
brother) has it and a 1/8 chance that individual III 4 (his first cousin) has it.
I
II
III
IV
Figure II 2 2. APedigree Illustrating Consanguinity
Figure II 2 2. A Pedigree Illustrating Consanguinity
Consequently, there is an increased risk of genetic disease in the offspring of
consanguineous matings. Dozens of empirical studies have examined the health
consequences of consanguinity, particularly first cousin matings. These studies
show that the offspring of first cousin matings are approximately twice as likely to
present with a genetic disease as are the offspring of unrelated matings. The
frequency of genetic disease increases further in the offspring of closer unions
(e.g., uncle/niece or brother/sister matings).
33
CHAPTER 2 | POPULATION GENETICS
Review Questions
1. A population has been assayed for a 4 allele polymorphism, and the follow
ing genotype counts have been obtained:
Genotype Count
1,1 4
1,3 8
1,4 3
2,3 5
2,4 9
3,3 4
3,4 6
4,4 11
On the basis of these genotype counts, what are the gene frequencies of
alleles 1 and 2?
A. 0.38, 0.28
B. 0.19, 0.14
C. 0.095, 0.07
D. 0.25, 0.25
E. 0.38, 0.20
2. Which of the following best characterizes Hardy Weinberg equilibrium?
A. Consanguinity has no effect on Hardy Weinberg equilibrium.
B. Genotype frequencies can be estimated from allele frequencies, but the
reverse is not true.
C. Natural selection has no effect on Hardy Weinberg equilibrium.
D. Once a population deviates from Hardy Weinberg equilibrium, it takes
many generations to return to equilibrium.
E. The frequency of heterozygous carriers of an autosomal recessive muta
tion can be estimated if one knows the incidence of affected homozy
gotes in the population.
33
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
3. In a genetic counseling session, a healthy couple has revealed that they are
first cousins and that they are concerned about health risks for their off
spring. Which of the following best characterizes these risks?
A. Because the couple shares approximately half of their genes, most of the
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
offspring are likely to be affected with some type of genetic disorder.
B. The couple has an increased risk of producing a child with an autosomal
dominant disease.
C. The couple has an increased risk of producing a child with an autosomal
recessive disease.
D. The couple has an increased risk of producing a child with Down syn
drome.
E. There is no known increase in risk for the offspring.
4. An African American couple has produced two children with sickle cell
disease. They have asked why this disease seems to be more common in the
African American population than in other U.S. populations. Which of the
following factors provides the best explanation?
A. Consanguinity
B. Genetic drift
C. Increased gene flow in this population
D. Increased mutation rate in this population
E. Natural selection
5. If the incidence of cystic fibrosis is 1/2,500 among a population of
Europeans, what is the predicted incidence of heterozygous carriers of a
cystic fibrosis mutation in this population?
A. 1/25
B. 1/50
C. 2/2,500
D. 1/2,500
E. (1/2,500)2
6. A man is a known heterozygous carrier of a mutation causing
hyperprolinemia, an autosomal recessive condition. Phenotypic expression
is variable and ranges from high urinary excretion of proline to neurologic
manifestations including seizures. Suppose that 0.0025% (1/40,000) of the
population is homozygous for the mutation causing this condition. If the
man mates with somebody from the general population, what is the proba
bility that he and his mate will produce a child who is homozygous for the
mutation involved?
A. 1% (1/100)
B. 0.5% (1/200)
C. 0.25% (1/400)
D. 0.1% (1/1,000)
E. 0.05% (1/2,000)
33
CHAPTER 2 | POPULATION GENETICS
7. The incidence of Duchenne muscular dystrophy in North America is about
1/3,000 males. On the basis for this figure, what is the gene frequency of
this X linked recessive mutation?
A. 1/3,000
B. 2/3,000
C. (1/3,000)2
D. 1/6,000
E. 1/9,000
33
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
Answers
1. Answer: B. The denominator of the gene frequency is 100, which is
obtained by adding the number of genotyped individuals (50) and
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences multiplying by 2 (because each individual has two alleles at the locus). The
numerator is obtained by counting the number of alleles of each type: the 4
homozygotes with the 1,1 genotype contribute 8 copies of allele 1; the 1,3
heterozygotes contribute another 8 alleles; and the 1,4 heterozygotes con
tribute 3 alleles. Adding these together, we obtain 19 copies of allele 1.
Dividing by 100, this yields a gene frequency of 0.19 for allele 1. For allele 2,
there are two classes of heterozygotes that have a copy of the allele: those
with the 2,3 and 2,4 genotypes. These 2 genotypes yield 5 and 9 copies of
allele 2, respectively, for a frequency of 14/100 = 0.14.
2. Answer: E. The incidence of affected homozygotes permits the estimation
of the frequency of the recessive mutation in the population. Using the
Hardy Weinberg equilibrium relationship between gene frequency and gen
otype frequency, the gene frequency can then be used to estimate the fre
quency of the heterozygous genotype in the population.
Consanguinity (choice A) affects Hardy Weinberg equilibrium by increas
ing the number of homozygotes in the population above the equilibrium
expectation (i.e., consanguinity results in a violation of the assumption of
random mating).
Genotype frequencies can be estimated from gene frequencies (choice B),
but gene frequencies can also be estimated from genotype frequencies (as
in choice A).
By eliminating a specific genotype from the population (e.g., affected
homozygotes), natural selection can cause deviations from equilibrium
(choice C).
Only one generation of random mating is required to return a population
to equilibrium (choice D).
3. Answer: C. Because the couple shares common ancestors (i.e., one set of
grandparents), they are more likely to be heterozygous carriers of the same
autosomal recessive disease causing mutations. Thus, their risk of produc
ing a child with an autosomal recessive disease is elevated above that of the
general population.
First cousins share approximately 1/8 of their genes, not 1/2 (choice A).
Because both members of the couple are healthy, neither one is likely to
harbor a dominant disease causing mutation (choice B). In addition,
consanguinity itself does not elevate the probability of producing a child
with a dominant disease because only one copy of the disease causing
allele is needed to cause the disease.
Down syndrome (choice D) typically is the result of a new mutation.
When it is transmitted by an affected female, it acts like a dominant
mutation and thus would not be affected by consanguinity.
Empirical studies indicate that the risk of genetic disease in the offspring
of first cousin couples is approximately double that of the general popula
tion (choice E).
33
CHAPTER 2 | POPULATION GENETICS
4. Answer: E. The frequency of sickle cell disease is elevated in many African
populations because heterozygous carriers of the sickle cell mutation are
resistant to malarial infection but do not develop sickle cell disease, which
is autosomal recessive. Thus, there is a selective advantage for the mutation
in heterozygous carriers, elevating its frequency in the population.
Consanguinity (choice A) could elevate the incidence of this autosomal
recessive disease in a specific family, but it does not account for the
elevated incidence of this specific disease in the African American
population in general.
The African American population is large and consequently would not be
expected to have experienced elevated levels of genetic drift (choice B).
Although there has been gene flow (choice C) from other populations into
the African American population, this would be expected to decrease,
rather than increase, the frequency of sickle cell disease because the
frequency of this disease is highest in some African populations.
There is no evidence that the mutation rate (choice D) is elevated in this
population. In contrast, the evidence for natural selection is very strong.
5. Answer: A. This answer is obtained by taking the square root of the
incidence (i.e., the frequency of affected homozygotes) to get a gene
frequency for the disease causing mutation (q) of 1/50 (0.02). The carrier
frequency is given by 2pq, or approximately 2q, or 1/25.
6. Answer: C. One must first determine the probability that the man’s mate
will also be a heterozygous carrier. If the frequency of affected homozygotes
(q2) is 1/40,000, then the allele frequency, q, is 1/200. The carrier frequency
in the population (approximately 2q) is 1/100. Three independent events
must happen for their child to be homozygous for the mutation. The mate
must be a carrier (probability 1/100), the mate must pass along the mutant
allele (probability 1/2), and the man must also pass along the mutant allele
(probability 1/2). Multiplying the 3 probabilities to determine the probabili
ty of their joint occurrence gives 1/100 × 1/2 × 1/2 = 1/400.
7. Answer: A. Because males have only a single X chromosome, each affected
male has one copy of the disease causing recessive mutation. Thus, the inci
dence of an X linked recessive disease in the male portion of a population
is a direct estimate of the gene frequency in the population.
33

3#
Cytogenetics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Interpret scenarios about basic definitions and terminology
❏ Solve problems concerning numerical chromosome abnormalities
❏ Demonstrate understanding of structural chromosome abnormalities
❏ Solve problems concerning advances in molecular cytogenetics
OVERVIEW
This chapter reviews diseases that are caused by microscopically observable
alterations in chromosomes. These alterations may involve the presence of extra
chromosomes or the loss of chromosomes. They may also consist of structural
alterations of chromosomes. Chromosome abnormalities are seen in approximate
ly 1 in 150 live births and are the leading known cause of intellectual disability. The
vast majority of fetuses with chromosome abnormalities are lost prenatally:
Chromosome abnormalities are seen in 50% of spontaneous fetal losses during the NOTE
first trimester of pregnancy, and they are seen in 20% of fetuses lost during the Xchromosome contains ~1,200 genes
second trimester. Thus, chromosome abnormalities are the leading known cause of
pregnancy loss. Ychromosome contains ~50 genes
BASIC DEFINITIONS AND TERMINOLOGY
Karyotype
Chromosomes are most easily visualized during the metaphase stage of mitosis,
when they are maximally condensed. They are photographed under the micro
scope to create a karyotype, an ordered display of the 23 pairs of human
chromosomes in a typical somatic cell (Figure II 3 1). In Figure II 3 1A, a
karyogram represents a drawing of each type of chromosome; the presentation is
haploid (only one copy of each chromosome is shown). Figure II 3 1B is a
karyotype of an individual male. It is diploid, showing both copies of each
autosome, the X and the Y chromosome. Chromosomes are ordered according to
size, with the sex chromosomes (X and Y) placed in the lower right portion of the
karyotype.
Metaphase chromosomes can be grouped according to size and to the position of
the centromere, but accurate identification requires staining with one of a variety
of dyes to reveal characteristic banding patterns.
33
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
Chromosome banding
To visualize chromosomes in a karyotype unambiguously, various stains are
applied so that banding is evident.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences • G banding. Mitotic chromosomes are partially digested with trypsin (to
digest some associated protein) and then stained with Giemsa, a dye that
binds DNA.
G banding reveals a pattern of light and dark (G bands) regions that allow
chromosomes to be accurately identified in a karyotype. There are several other
stains that can be used in a similar manner. The chromosomes depicted in Figure
II 3 1 have been stained with Giemsa.
3 2 2 2
p 2 1 2 1 1 1 p 1 2 1 2 1 1 1 1
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1 1 2 q2 2
2 2 2 3 2 3 2 2 2
q 2 2 3 4
3 3
4
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
p q 1 1 2 3 1 1 2 1 1 2 1 1 2 1 1 2 1 1 2 1 1 1 2 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 1 2 1
3
2
13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 Y X
Negative or pale staining 'Q' and 'G' bands Positive 'R' bands
Positive 'Q' and 'G' bands Negative 'R' bands
Variable bands
A
B
Figure II 3 1. Human Metaphase Chromosomes. (A) Idealized Drawing
Figure II 3 1. Human Metaphase Chromosomes. (A) Idealized Drawing
(Karyogram) and (B) Photograph of Metaphase Chromosomes (Karyotype)
(Karyogram) and (B) Photograph of Metaphase Chromosomes (Karyotype)
34
CHAPTER 3 | CYTOGENETICS
Chromosome abnormalities in some cases can be identified visually by looking at
the banding pattern, but this technique reveals differences (for instance, larger dele
tions) only to a resolution of about 4 Mb. Smaller abnormalities (microdeletions)
must be identified in other ways (FISH), discussed at the end of the chapter.
Chromosome nomenclature
Each mitotic chromosome contains a centromere and two sister chromatids
because the cell has gone through interphase and has entered mitosis when the
karyotype analysis is performed (metaphase). The long arm of the chromosome is
labeled q, and the short arm is labeled p. One of the characteristics described is the
relative position of the centromere.
• Metacentric chromosomes (for instance, chromosome 1) have the centro
mere near the middle. The p and q arms are of roughly equal length.
• Submetacentric chromosomes have the centromere displaced toward one
end (for example, chromosome 4). The p and q arms are evident.
• Acrocentric chromosomes have the centromere far toward one end. In
these chromosomes, the p arm contains little genetic information, most of
it residing on the q arm. Chromosomes 13, 14, 15, 21, and 22 are the
acrocentric chromosomes. Only the acrocentric chromosomes are
involved in
• Robertsonian translocations, which will be discussed in this chapter.
The tips of the chromosomes are called telomeres.
Table II 3 1 contains some standard nomenclature applied to chromosomes.
Table II 3 1. Common Symbols Used in Karyotype Nomenclature
1 22 Autosome number
X, Y Sex chromosomes
(+) or ( ) When placed before an autosomal number, indicates that
chromosome is extra or missing
p Short arm of the chromosome
q Long arm of the chromosome
t Translocation
NOTE
del Deletion
HY Euploid Cells (multipHleY of
23 chromosomes)
MY MY
• Haploid (23 chromosomes): gametes
LY LY
NUMERICAL CHROMOSOME ABNORMALITIES • Diploid (46 chromosomes): most
somatic cells
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Euploidy
• Triploid (69 chromosomes): rare lethal
When a cell has a multiple of 23 chromosomes, it is said to be eMuEplDoiIdU.M GYamIEeLteDs McEoDndIUitiMon YIELD
(sperm and egg cells) are euploid cells that have 23 chromosomes (one member of
each pair); they are said to be haploid. Most somatic cells are diploid, LOW contai Y ni I n E g LD • TetraploidLOW (92YIELcDhromosomes): very
both members of each pair, or 46 chromosomes. rare lethal condition
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
34
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
Two types of euploid cells with abnormal numbers of chromosomes are seen in
humans: triploidy and tetraploidy.
Triploidy refers to cells that contain 3 copies of each chromosome (69 total).
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Triploidy, which usually occurs as a result of the fertilization of an ovum by 2
sperm cells, is common at conception, but the vast majority of these conceptions
are lost prenatally. However, about 1 in 10,000 live births is a triploid. These babies
have multiple defects of the heart and central nervous system, and they do not
survive. HY
Tetraploidy refers to cells that contain 4 copies of each chromosome (92 totaMl).Y
This lethal condition is much rarer than triploidy among live births: Only a few
cases have been described. LY
High Yield H
Aneuploidy
Aneuploidy, a deviation from the euploid number, represents tMheEDIUgMain (+)YIELDor loss ME
( ) of a specific chromosome. Two major forms of aneuploidy are observed:
LOW YIELD
• Monosomy (loss of a chromosome)
• Trisomy (gain of a chromosome)
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
REINFORCEMENT R
Autosomal aneuploidy
Two generalizations are helpful:
• All autosomal monosomies are inconsistent with a live birth.
• Only 3 autosomal trisomies (trisomy 13, 18, and 21) are consistent with a
live birth.
Trisomy 21 (47,XY,+21 or 47,XX,+21); Down Syndrome
• Most common autosomal trisomy
• Intellectual disability
• Short stature
• Hypotonia
• Depressed nasal bridge, upslanting palpebral fissures, epicanthal fold
• Congenital heart defects in approximately 40% of cases
• Increased risk of acute lymphoblastic leukemia
• Alzheimer disease by fifth or sixth decade (amyloid precursor protein, APP
gene on chromosome 21)
• Reduced fertility
• Risk increases with increased maternal age
Trisomy 18 (47,XY,+18 or 47,XX,+18); Edward Syndrome
• Clenched fist with overlapping fingers
• Inward turning, “rocker bottom” feet
• Congenital heart defects
• Low set ears, micrognathia (small lower jaw)
• Intellectual disability
• Very poor prognosis
342
CHAPTER 3 | CYTOGENETICS
Trisomy 13 (47,XY,+13 or 47,XX,+13); Patau Syndrome
• Polydactyly (extra fingers and toes)
• Cleft lip, palate
• Microphthalmia (small eyes)
• Microcephaly, intellectual disability
• Cardiac and renal defects
• Very poor prognosis
Sex chromosome aneuploidy NOTE
Aneuploidy involving the sex chromosomes is relatively common and tends to Trisomy is the most common genetic cause
have less severe consequences than does autosomal aneuploidy. Some generaliza
of spontaneous loss of pregnancy.
tions are helpful:
• At least one X chromosome is required for survival.
• If a Y chromosome is present, the phenotype is male (with minor exceptions).
• If more than one X chromosome is present, all but one will become a Barr
body in each cell.
The two important sex chromosome aneuploidies are Turner syndrome and
Klinefelter syndrome.
Klinefelter Syndrome (47,XXY)
• Testicular atrophy
• Infertility
• Gynecomastia
NOTE
• Female distribution of hair Genetic Mosaicism in Turner Syndrome
• Low testosterone
Genetic mosaicism is defined as a condition
• Elevated FSH and LH
in which there are cells of different
• High pitched voice genotypes or chromosome constitutions
within a single individual. Some women with
Turner Syndrome (45,X or 45,XO)
Turner syndrome have somatic cells that are
• Only monosomy consistent with life 45,X and others that are 46,XX or 47,XXX.
• 50% are 45,X Mosaicism in Turner syndrome is thought to
arise in early embryogenesis by mechanisms
• Majority of others are mosaics for 45,X and one other cell lineage (46,XX,
that are not completely understood
47,XXX, 46,XY)
• Females with 45,X;46,XY are at increased risk for gonadal blastoma.
• Short stature
• Edema of wrists and ankles in newborn
• Cystic hygroma in utero resulting in excess nuchal skin and “webbed”
neck
• Primary amenorrhea
• Coarctation of the aorta or other congenital heart defect in some cases
• Infertility
• Gonadal dysgenesis
343
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
Nondisjunction is the usual cause of aneuploidies
Germ cells undergo meiosis to produce the haploid egg or sperm. The original cell
is diploid for all chromosomes, although only one homologous pair is shown in
the figure for simplicity. The same events would occur for each pair of homologs
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
within the cell.
In nondisjunction of one homologous pair (for example, chromosome 21) during
meiosis 1, all other homologs segregate (disjoin) normally in the cell. Two of the
gametes are diploid for chromosome 21. When fertilization occurs, the conception
will be a trisomy 21 with Down syndrome. The other gametes with no copy of
chromosome 21 will result in conceptions that are monosomy 21, a condition
incompatible with a live birth.
In nondisjunction during meiosis 2, the sister chromatids of a chromosome (for
example, chromosome 21) fail to segregate (disjoin). The sister chromatids of all
other chromosomes segregate normally. One of the gametes is diploid for
chromosome 21. When fertilization occurs, the conception will be a trisomy 21
with Down syndrome. One gamete has no copy of chromosome 21 and will result
in a conception that is a monosomy 21. The remaining two gametes are normal
haploid ones.
Some important points:
• Nondisjunction is the usual cause of aneuploidies including Down,
Edward, Patau, Turner, and Klinefelter syndromes.
• Nondisjunction is more likely to occur during oogenesis than during
spermatogenesis.
• Nondisjunction is more likely with increasing maternal age. Environ
mental agents (e.g., radiation, alcohol) appear to have no measurable
influence.
• Nondisjunction is more likely in meiosis I than meiosis II.
CLINICAL CORRELATE: MATERNAL AGE AND RISK OF DOWN SYNDROME
Surveys of babies with trisomy 21 show that 90–95% of the time, the extra
copy of the chromosome is contributed by the mother (similar figures are
obtained for trisomies of the 18th and 13th chromosomes). The increased risk
of Down syndrome with maternal age is well documented.
• For women age <30 the risk of bearing a child with Down is <1/1,000.
• At age 35 the risk increases to about 1/400.
• At age 40 the risk increases to 1/100.
• At age ≥45 the risk increases to about 1/25.
This increase reflects an elevated rate of nondisjunction in older ova (recall
that all of a woman’s egg cells are formed during her fetal development and
they remain suspended in prophase I until ovulation).
There is no corresponding increase in risk with advanced paternal age; sperm
cells are generated continuously throughout the life of the male.
34
CHAPTER 3 | CYTOGENETICS
The increased risk of trisomy with advanced maternal age motivates >50% of
pregnant women in North America to undergo prenatal diagnosis (typically
amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling). Down syndrome can also be
screened by assaying maternal serum levels of α fetoprotein, chorionic
gonadotropin, and unconjugated estriol. This so called triple screen can detect
approximately 70% of fetuses with Down.
STRUCTURAL CHROMOSOME ABNORMALITIES
Structural alterations of chromosomes occur when chromosomes are broken by
agents termed clastogens (e.g., radiation, some viruses, and some chemicals).
Some alterations may result in a loss or gain of genetic material and are called
unbalanced alterations; balanced alterations do not result in a gain or loss of
HY HY
genetic material and usually have fewer clinical consequences. As with other types
of mutations, structural alterations can occur either in the germ line or in sMomYatic MY
cells. The former can be transmitted to offspring. The latter, although not transmit
ted to offspring, can alter genetic material such that the cell can give rise to cancLeYr. LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Translocations
Translocations occur when chromosomes are broken and the bMroEkDenIUM elemeYnItsELD MEDIUM YIELD
reattach to other chromosomes. Translocations can be classified into two major
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
types: reciprocal and Robertsonian.
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
Reciprocal translocation
Reciprocal translocations occur when genetic material is exchanged REINFORbeCtEwMeeEnNT REINFORCEMENT
nonhomologous chromosomes; for example, chromosomes 2 and 8 (Figure
II 3 2). If this happens during gametogenesis, the offspring will carry the recipro
cal translocation in all his or her cells and will be called a translocation carrier.
The karyotype would be 46,XY,t(2p;8p) or 46,XX,t(2p;8p). Because this individual
has all of the genetic material (balanced, albeit some of it misplaced because of the
translocation), there are often no clinical consequences other than during repro
duction.
2 2 8 8 2 t(2p;8p) 8
Figure II 3 3. A Reciprocal Translocation
Figure II 3 2. AReciprocal Translocation
34
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
In a translocation carrier, during gametogenesis and meiosis, unbalanced genetic
material can be transmitted to the offspring, causing partial trisomies and partial
monosomies typically resulting in pregnancy loss. During meiosis 1, the translo
cated chromosomes may segregate as chromosome 8 or as chromosome 2, produc
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences ing a variety of possible gametes with respect to these chromosomes.
NOTE Reciprocal Translocations After Birth. Reciprocal translocations may occur by
Reciprocal Translocations and Pregnancy chance at the somatic cell level throughout life. Because these translocations
Loss involve only a single cell and the genetic material is balanced, there is often no
consequence. Rarely, however, a reciprocal translocation may alter the expression
When one parent is a reciprocal or structure of an oncogene or a tumor suppressor gene, conferring an abnormal
translocation carrier: growth advantage to the cell.
• Adjacent segregation produces
unbalanced genetic material and most
CHRONIC MYELOGENOUS LEUKEMIA AND THE PHILADELPHIA CHROMOSOME
likely loss of pregnancy.
Although most of our discussion deals with inherited chromosome alterations,
• Alternate segregation produces a
rearrangements in somatic cells can lead to the formation of cancers by
normal haploid gamete (and diploid
altering the genetic control of cellular proliferation. A classic example is a
conception) or a liveborn who is a
reciprocal translocation of the long arms of chromosomes 9 and 22, termed
phenotypically normal translocation
the Philadelphia chromosome. This translocation alters the activity of the abl
carrier.
proto oncogene (proto oncogenes can lead to cancer). When this alteration
occurs in hematopoietic cells, it can result in chronic myelogenous leukemia.
More than 100 different chromosome rearrangements involving nearly every
chromosome have been observed in more than 40 types of cancer.
BRIDGE TO PATHOLOGY Robertsonian translocations
Translocations are seen in a variety of These translocations are much more common than reciprocal translocations and
are estimated to occur in approximately 1 in 1,000 live births. They occur only in
cancers. Important examples include:
the acrocentric chromosomes (13, 14, 15, 21, and 22) and involve the loss of the
• t(9;22) chronic myelogenous leukemia short arms of two of the chromosomes and subsequent fusion of the long arms. As
(c abl) an example of a Robertsonian translocation involving chromosomes 14 and 21, the
karyotype of a male translocation carrier is designated 45,XY,–14,–21,+t(14q;21q).
• t(15;17) acute myelogenous leukemia Because the short arms of the acrocentric chromosomes contain no essential
(retinoid receptor α) genetic material, their loss produces no clinical consequences, and the transloca
tion carrier is not clinically affected.
• t(14;18) follicular lymphomas (bcl 2
that inhibits apoptosis)
• t(8;14) Burkitt lymphoma (c myc)
• t(11;14) mantle cell lymphoma (cyclin D)
21 21
14 14 14 t(14;21) 21
Figure II 3 5. A Robertsonian Translocation
Figure II 3 3. ARobertsonian Translocation
34
CHAPTER 3 | CYTOGENETICS
Robertsonian Translocation and Down Syndrome. Approximately 5% of Down
syndrome cases are the result of a Robertsonian translocation affecting chromo
some 14 and chromosome 21. When a translocation carrier produces gametes,
the translocation chromosome can segregate with the normal 14 or with the
normal 21.
Although adjacent segregation usually results in pregnancy loss, one important
exception is that which produces trisomy 21. This may be a live birth, resulting in
an infant with Down syndrome.
One can determine the mechanism leading to Down syndrome by examining the
karyotype. Trisomy 21 due to nondisjunction during meiosis (95% of Down
syndrome cases) has the karyotype 47,XX,+21 or 47,XY,+21. In the 5% of cases
where Down syndrome is due to a Robertsonian translocation in a parent, the
karyotype will be 46,XX,–14,+t(14q;21q) or 46,XY,–14,+t(14q;21q). The key
difference is 47 versus 46 chromosomes in the individual with Down syndrome.
Although the recurrence risk for trisomy 21 due to nondisjunction during meiosis is
very low, the recurrence risk for offspring of the Robertsonian translocation carrier
parent is significantly higher. The recurrence risk (determined empirically) for female
translocation carriers is 10–15%, and that for male translocation carriers is 1–2%.
The reason for the difference between males and females is not well understood.
The elevated recurrence risk for translocation carriers versus noncarriers under
scores the importance of ordering a chromosome study when Down syndrome is
suspected in a newborn.
Down syndrome (nondisjunction during Down syndrome (parent carries a Rob
meiosis) ertsonian translocation)
• 47,XX,+21 or 47,XY.+21 • 46,XX, 14,+t(14;21), or
46,XY, 14,+t(14;21)
• No association with prior
pregnancy loss • May be associated with prior
pregnancy loss
• Older mother
• May be a younger mother HY HY
• Very low recurrence rate
• Recurrence rate 10–15% if mom
MY MY
is translocation carrier; 1–2% if
dad is translocation carrier LY LY
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Deletions
A deletion occurs when a chromosome loses some of its genetic MEDiInUfoMrmation. YIELD MEDIUM YIELD
Terminal deletions (the end of the chromosome is lost) and interstitial deletions
(material within the chromosome is lost) may be caused by agents thatLOWcauseYIELD LOW YIELD
chromosome breaks and by unequal crossover during meiosis.
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTAL
Deletions can be large and microscopically visible in a stained preparation. Figure
II 3 4 shows both an interstitial deletion and a terminal deletion of 5p. Both result
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
in Cri du chat syndrome.
• 46,XX or 46,XY, del(5p)
• High pitched, cat like cry
• Intellectual disability, microcephaly
• Congenital heart disease
347
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Interstitial deletion Normal Terminal deletion
Chromosome cchhrroommoossoommee 55 Chromosome
del(5p14–15.3) del(5p15.1)
Figure II 3 7. Terminal and Interstitial Deletions of Chromosome 5p
Figure II 3 4. Terminal and Interstitial Deletions of Chromosome 5p
Some deletions may be so small that they are not readily apparent microscopically
without special fluorescent probes (FISH) (called “microdeletions”). Examples
include Prader Willi and Angelman syndromes.
If a microdeletion includes several contiguous genes, a variety of phenotypic
outcomes may be part of the genetic syndrome. Examples include:
• DiGeorge syndrome: congenital absence of the thymus and parathyroids,
hypocalcemic tetany, T cell immunodeficiency, characteristic facies with
cleft palate, heart defects
• Wilms tumor: aniridia, genital abnormalities, intellectual disability
(formerly mental retardation) (WAGR)
• Williams syndrome: hypercalcemia, supravalvular aortic stenosis, intellec
tual disability, characteristic facies
NOTE OTHER CHROMOSOME ABNORMALITIES
Structural Abnormalities
Several other types of structural abnormalities are seen in human karyotypes. In
general, their frequency and clinical consequences tend to be less severe than those
• Translocations (Robertsonian and
of translocations and deletions.
reciprocal)
• Deletions and duplications
Inversions
• Inversions (pericentric and
Inversions occur when the chromosome segment between two breaks is reinserted
paracentric)
in the same location but in reverse order. Inversions that include the centromere
are termed pericentric, whereas those that do not include the centromere are
• Ring chromosomes
termed paracentric. The karyotype of the inversion shown in Figure II 3 5,
• Isochromosomes extending from 3p21 to 3q13 is 46,XY,inv(3)(p21;q13). Inversion carriers still
retain all of their genetic material, so they are usually unaffected (although an
inversion may interrupt or otherwise affect a specific gene and thus cause disease).
Because homologous chromosomes must line up during meiosis, inverted
34
CHAPTER 3 | CYTOGENETICS
chromosomes will form loops that, through recombination, may result in a gamete
that contains a deletion or a duplication, which may then be transmitted to the
offspring.
PERICENTRIC INVERSION OF CHROMOSOME 16
A male infant, the product of a full term pregnancy, was born with
hypospadias and ambiguous genitalia. He had a poor sucking reflex, fed
poorly, and had slow weight gain. He had wide set eyes, a depressed nasal
bridge, and microcephaly. The father stated that several members of his family,
including his brother, had an abnormal chromosome 16. His brother had two
children, both healthy, and the father assumed that he would also have normal
children. Karyotype analysis confirmed that the father had a pericentric
inversion of chromosome 16 and that his infant son had a duplication of
material on 16q, causing a small partial trisomy.
Chromosome 3 Inv(3)(p21q13)
Figure II 3 8. A Pericentric Inversion of Chromosome 3
Figure II 3 5. APericentric Inversion of Chromosome 3
Ring Chromosome
A ring chromosome can form when a deletion occurs on both tips of a chromo
some and the remaining chromosome ends fuse together. The karyotype for a
female with a ring chromosome X would be 46,X,r(X). Ring chromosomes are
often lost, resulting in a monosomy (e.g., loss of a ring X chromosome would
produce Turner syndrome). These chromosomes have been observed at least once
for each human chromosome.
34
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
HY
X chromosome r(X)
MY
Figure II 3 9. Ring X Chromosome
Figure II 3 6. Ring XChromosome LY
High Yield H
Isochromosome
When a chromosome divides along the axis perpendicular to iMtsEDnIUorMmal YaIExiLsD of ME
division, an isochromosome is created (i.e., 2 copies of one arm but no copy of
the other). Because of the lethality of autosomal isochromosomes, moLstOW isoYchIEroLD
mosomes that have been observed in live births involve the X chromosome, as
shown in Figure II 3 7. The karyotype of an isochromosome for the long arm of
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
the X chromosome would be 46,X,i(Xq); this karyotype results in an individual
with Turner syndrome, indicating that most of the critical genes RrEeIsNpoFnOsRibCleEMENT for RE
the Turner phenotype are on Xp.
X chromosome Xi(q)
Figure II 3 10. Isochromosome Xq
Figure II 3 7. Isochromosome Xq
35
CHAPTER 3 | CYTOGENETICS
ADVANCES IN MOLECULAR CYTOGENETICS
HY HY
Although chromosome abnormalities are still commonly visualized by examining
metaphase chromosomes under a microscope, several powerful new techniquesMY MY
combine cytogenetics with modern molecular methods. Two of the most impor
tant techniques are described here. LY LY
High Yield NOTE HIGH YIELD
Fluorescence in situ Hybridization (FISH)
FISH analysis detects aneuploidies,
In fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), a chromosome spMecEifDicIUM DNAYIELD MEDIUM YIELD
segment is labeled with a fluorescent tag to create a probe. This probe is then translocations, and deletions (including
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
hybridized with the patient’s chromosomes, which are visualized under a fluores microdeletions).
cence microscope.
FUNDAMENTALS FUNDAMENTALS
Because the probe will hybridize only with a complementary DNA sequence, the
probe will mark the presence of the chromosome segment being tested. For
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
example, a probe that is specific for chromosome 21 will hybridize in 3 places in
the cells of a trisomy 21 patient, providing a diagnosis of Down syndrome.
FISH is also commonly used to detect deletions. An analysis using a probe that
hybridizes to the region of 15q corresponding to Prader Willi syndrome
(see Chapter 1) will show only a single signal in a patient, confirming the diagnosis
of this deletion syndrome.
An advantage of FISH is that chromosomes do not have to be in the metaphase
stage for accurate diagnosis. Even though interphase and prophase chromosomes
cannot be clearly visualized themselves, the number of hybridization signals can
still be counted accurately.
Spectral Karyotyping
Spectral karyotyping involves the use of 5 different fluorescent probes that
hybridize differentially to different sets of chromosomes. In combination with a
special camera and image processing software, this technique produces a karyo
type in which every chromosome is “painted” a different color. This allows for the
ready visualization of chromosome rearrangements such as small translocations,
e.g., the Philadelphia chromosome rearrangement t(9;22) involved in chronic
myelogenous leukemia.
35
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
Review Questions
Select the ONE best answer.
1. A 26 year old woman has produced two children with Down syndrome,
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
and she has also had two miscarriages. Which of the following would be the
best explanation?
A. Her first cousin has Down syndrome.
B. Her husband is 62 years old.
C. She carries a reciprocal translocation involving chromosomes 14 and 18.
D. She carries a Robertsonian translocation involving chromosomes 14
and 21.
E. She was exposed to multiple x rays as a child.
2. A 6 year old boy has a family history of intellectual disability and has
developmental delay and some unusual facial features. He is being evaluat
ed for possible fragile X syndrome. Which of the following would be most
useful in helping establish the diagnosis?
A. Genetic test for a trinucleotide repeat expansion in the fragile X gene
B. IQ test
C. Karyotype of the child’s chromosomes
D. Karyotype of the father’s chromosomes
E. Measurement of testicular volume
3. A couple has one son, who is age 7. Multiple attempts to have a second
child have ended in miscarriages and spontaneous abortions. Karyotypes of
the mother, the father, and the most recently aborted fetus are represented
schematically below. What is the most likely explanation for the most recent
pregnancy loss?
Mother Father Fetal tissue
A. Aneuploidy in the fetus
B. Fetus identified as a reciprocal translocation carrier
C. Nondisjunction during oogenesis in the mother
D. Partial monosomy and trisomy in the fetus
E. Unbalanced chromosomal material in the father
35
CHAPTER 3 | CYTOGENETICS
4. A woman brings her 16 year old daughter to a physician because she has
not yet begun menstruating. Although her parents are both 1.75 meters, the
patient is 1.5 meters and has always been below the 50th percentile in
height. Physical examination reveals no breast development. She has no
problems in school and is of normal intelligence. What is the most likely
underlying basis for her condition?
A. A 45,X karyotype
B. A balanced reciprocal translocation
C. A balanced Robertsonian translocation
D. Two Barr bodies
E. Deletion of an imprinted locus
5. A 38 year old woman in her 15th week of pregnancy undergoes ultraso
nography that reveals an increased area of nuchal transparency.
Amniocentesis is recommended and performed at 16 weeks’ gestation. The
amniotic karyotype is 46,XYadd(18)(p.11.2), indicating additional chromo
somal material on the short arm of one chromosome 18 at band 11.2. All
other chromosomes are normal. What is the most likely cause of this fetal
karyotype?
A. A balanced reciprocal translocation in one of the parents
B. A balanced Robertsonian translocation in one of the parents
C. An isochromosome 18i(p) in one of the parents
D. Nondisjunction during meiosis 1 in one of the parents
E. Nondisjunction during meiosis 2 in one of the parents
6. A 37 year old woman is brought to emergency department because of
crampy abdominal pain and vaginal bleeding for 3 hours. She is 11 weeks
pregnant. This is her first pregnancy. Her pregnancy has been unremark
able until this episode. Her temperature is 36.8 C (98.2 F), pulse is 106/min,
blood pressure is 125/70 mm Hg, and respiration rate is 22/min. Speculum
examination shows the presence of blood in the vagina and cervical dilata
tion. Inevitable spontaneous abortion is suspected. After discussing the
condition with the patient, she gave her consent for dilatation and curet
tage. What is the most common cause of spontaneous abortions?
A. Chromosomal abnormality, polyploidy
B. Chromosomal abnormality, monosomy X
C. Chromosomal abnormality, trisomy
D. Effects of environmental chemicals
E. Immunologic rejection
F. Infection
G. Maternal endocrinopathies
H. Physical stresses
I. Teratogenic drugs
35
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
Answers
1. Answer: D. As a translocation carrier, it is possible that she can transmit
the translocated chromosome, containing the long arms of both 14 and 21,
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences to each of her offspring. If she also transmits her normal copy of chromo
some 21, then she will effectively transmit two copies of chromosome 21.
When this egg cell is fertilized by a sperm cell carrying another copy of
chromosome 21, the zygote will receive 3 copies of the long arm of chromo
some 21. The miscarriages may represent fetuses that inherited 3 copies of
the long arm and were spontaneously aborted during pregnancy.
Although the risk for Down syndrome increases if a woman has had a
previous child, there is no evidence that the risk increases if a more distant
relative, such as a first cousin, is affected (choice A).
Although there is no conclusive evidence for an increased risk of Down
syndrome with advanced maternal age, there is little or no evidence for a
paternal age effect on Down syndrome risk (choice B).
An extra copy of material from chromosome 14 or 18 (choice C)could
result in a miscarriage, but neither would produce children with Down
syndrome, which is caused by an extra copy of the long arm of chromo
some 21.
Heavy irradiation has been shown to induce nondisjunction in some
experimental animals, but there is no good evidence for a detectable effect
on human trisomy (choice E).
2. Answer: A. The presence of an expanded trinucleotide repeat in the 5′
untranslated region of the gene is an accurate test for fragile X syndrome.
An IQ test (choice B)would be useful because the IQ is typically much
lower than average in fragile X syndrome patients. However, many other
syndromes also include intellectual disability as a feature, so this would
not be a specific test.
A karyotype of the child’s chromosomes (choice C) might reveal X
chromosomes with the decondensed long arm characteristic of this
syndrome, but not all chromosomes have this appearance in affected
individuals. Thus, the karyotype may yield a false negative diagnosis.
The father’s chromosomes (choice D) will not be relevant because this is
an X linked disorder.
Testicular volume (choice E) is increased in males with fragile X syndrome,
but this is observed in postpubertal males.
35
CHAPTER 3 | CYTOGENETICS
3. Answer: D. The fetal karyotype shows a partial trisomy and a partial
monosomy.
Fetal tissue
The fetus has 46 chromosomes, indicating euploidy (a multiple of 23), not
aneuploidy (choice A). The father is the reciprocal translocation carrier,
not the fetus (choice B). Nondisjunction during meiosis (choice C)
produces full trisomies and chromosomes have normal structure.
Although the father is a translocation carrier, his genetic material is
balanced, not unbalanced (choice E). He is diploid for all loci.
4. Answer: A. The daughter most likely has Turner syndrome, monosomy X,
or 45,X. It should be high on the differential diagnosis list for a female ado
lescent of short stature who presents with primary amenorrhea. Women
with Turner syndrome have streak gonads, and the absence of ovarian func
tion is responsible for failure to develop many secondary sex characteristics.
Balanced translocations (choices B and C) have few, if any, consequences
on the phenotype, although they may result in pregnancy loss of concep
tions with unbalanced chromosome material.
Women with Turner syndrome have no Barr body. Two Barr bodies
(choice D) would be consistent with a 47,XXX karyotype or a 48,XXXY
karyotype, neither of which produces the phenotype described.
Deletion of a locus subject to imprinting (choice E) is consistent with
Prader Will syndrome or Angelman syndrome but is not associated with
the phenotype described.
5. Answer: A. The fetus has unbalanced chromosomal material (additional
chromosomal material on one copy of chromosome 18). One of the parents
is likely to be a carrier of a reciprocal translocation involving chromosome
18 and one other chromosome (unspecified in stem).
A Robertsonian translocation (choice B) would result in fusion of q arms
from two acrocentric chromosomes. This is not what is described in the
fetal karyotype.
Isochromosome 18(p) indicates a chromosome 18 with two p arms and no
q arms (choice C). This is not the abnormality described in the fetal
karyotype.
Nondisjunction during either meiosis 1 or meiosis 2 (choices D and E)
would produce a full trisomy.
35
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
6. Answer: C. Chromosomal abnormalities are responsible for about 50% of
first trimester spontaneous abortions, and of these the most common cause
is trisomy (52%). The most common trisomy in spontaneous abortion is
trisomy 16. Polyploidy (choice A) is seen in 22% and monosomy (choice B)
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences in 19%.
All other listed causes can also cause miscarriage; however, these problems
are less common than chromosomal anomalies. Chronic Myelogenous
Leukemia and the Philadelphia Chromosome
35
4#
Recombination Frequency
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Solve problems concerning polymorphic markers and linkage analysis
❏ Demonstrate understanding of determining recombination frequency
accurately
❏ Explain information related to LOD scores
OVERVIEW
An important step in understanding the basis of an inherited disease is to locate
the gene(s) responsible for the disease. This chapter provides an overview of the
techniques that have been used to map and clone thousands of human genes.
POLYMORPHIC MARKERS AND LINKAGE ANALYSIS
A prerequisite for successful linkage analysis is the availability of a large number of
highly polymorphic markers dispersed throughout the genome. There are several
classes of polymorphic markers; over 20,000 individual examples of these poly
morphic markers at known locations have been identified and are available for
linkage studies. Collectively, these markers provide a marker map of each chromo
some, so when one wishes to map the position of a gene—often one involved in a
disease process—the gene’s position can be located relative to one or more markers
by recombination mapping. These high density marker maps allow genome wide
screening for mapping genes.
35
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
NOTE
In an RFLP, the presence or absence of a restriction site ( ) produces DNA
fragments of varying lengths, reflecting sequence variation.
Chromosome gene and marker maps are
available online at pubmed.gov. GAATTC GAATTC GAATTC
GAATTC GACTTC GAATTC
In a VNTR, variation in fragment lengths is produced by differences in the number
of tandem repeats located between two restriction sites ( ).
In an STRP, variation in fragment lengths is produced by differences in the number
of microsatellite repeats found between two PCR primer sites ( ).
TGTGTGTGTG
TGTGTG
SNPs are single differences in a nucleotide sequence.
ACCGTCCG
ACCCTCCG
Figure II 4 1. Types of DNA Polymorphisms
Figure II 5 1. Different Types of DNA Polymorphisms
35
CHAPTER 4 | RECOMBINATION FREQUENCY
RFLPs (restriction fragment length polymorphisms)
Restriction endonuclease (RE) sites—palindromes recognized by specific
restriction endonucleases—can serve as 2 allele markers. A specific site may be
present in some individuals (allele 1) and absent in others (allele 2), producing
different sized restriction fragments that can be visualized on a Southern blot.
Alternatively, the area containing the restriction site can be amplified by using a
PCR (polymerase chain reaction) and treating the PCR product with the
restriction enzyme to determine whether one (RE site absent) or two (RE site
present) fragments are produced. The PCR product(s) can be separated by agarose
gel electrophoresis and visualized directly without using a blot.
VNTRs (variable number of tandem repeats)
These polymorphisms are the result of varying numbers of minisatellite repeats in
a specific region of a chromosome. The minisatellite repeat units typically range in
size from 20 to 70 bases each. The repeat is flanked on both sides by a restriction
site, and variation in the number of repeats produces restriction fragments of vary
ing size. VNTRs are used infrequently in current genetic mapping, as they tend to
cluster near the ends of chromosomes.
STRPs (short tandem repeat polymorphisms, or microsatellites)
Short tandem repeat polymorphisms are repetitive sequences in which the
repeated unit is generally 2–6 bases long. An example of a dinucleotide repeat
(CA/TG) is shown above. These markers have many alleles in the population, with
each different repeat length at a locus representing a different allele. STRPs can be
amplified with a PCR by using primers designed to flank the repeat block. Varia
tion in the number of repeats produces PCR products of varying length, which can
then be visualized on agarose gel electrophoresis. STRPs are distributed through
out the chromosomes, making them very useful in mapping genes. STRPs are used
in paternity testing and in forensic cases, but these sequences can also be used in
gene mapping.
SNPs (single nucleotide polymorphisms)
SNPs represent nucleotide positions in the human genome where only two
nucleotides—for example, C or G—are found. These occur on average about once
in every 1,000 base pairs (bp) and, like STRPs, are very useful in mapping genes.
Unlike STRPs, which have multiple alleles at each locus, SNPs are usually two
allele markers (either G or C in the above example). These can be typed by PCR
amplification and identification by sequencing or through the use of probes on
DNA chips, a process which can be automated.
35
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
GENE MAPPING: LINKAGE ANALYSIS
Crossing Over, Recombination, and Linkage
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences The first step in gene mapping is to establish linkage with a known polymorphic
marker (one with at least two alleles in the population). This can be done by
recombination mapping to determine whether the gene is near a particular
marker. Multiple markers on different chromosomes are used to establish linkage
(or the lack of it).
Recombination mapping is based on crossing over during meiosis, the type of cell
division that produces haploid ova and sperm. During prophase I of meiosis,
homologous chromosomes line up and occasionally exchange portions of their
DNA. This process is termed crossover.
Figure II 5 2. The Process of Crossing Over Between
Homologous Chromosomes
Figure II 4 2. Process of Crossing Over Between
Homologous Chromosomes
When a crossover event occurs between two loci, G and M, the resulting
chromosomes may contain a new combination of alleles at loci G and M. When
a new combination occurs, the crossover has produced a recombination.
Because crossover events occur more or less randomly across chromosomes, loci
that are located farther apart are more likely to experience an intervening
crossover and thus a recombination of alleles. Recombination frequency
provides a means of assessing the distance between loci on chromosomes, a key
goal of gene mapping.
• If the gene of interest (with alleles G1 and G2) and the marker (with alleles
M1 and M2) are on different chromosomes, the alleles will remain together
in an egg or a sperm only about 50% of the time. They are unlinked.
• If the gene and the marker are on the same chromosome but are far
apart, the alleles will remain together about 50% of the time. The larger
distance between the gene and the marker allows multiple crossovers to
occur between the alleles during prophase I of meiosis. An odd number
of crossovers separates G1 from M1 (recombination), whereas an even
number of crossovers places the alleles together on the same chromo
some (no recombination). The gene and marker are again defined as
unlinked.
• If the gene and the marker are close together on the same chromosome, a
crossover between the two alleles is much less likely to occur. Therefore,
G1 and M1 are likely to remain on the same chromosome more than 50%
of the time. In other words, they show less than 50% recombination. The
gene and the marker are now defined as linked.
36
CHAPTER 4 | RECOMBINATION FREQUENCY
Gene and marker on different chromosomes. If a cell gets G1, then 50%
of the time it will get M1 and 50% of the time it will get M2. Gene and
marker are unlinked.
G1 G2
No recombination
G1 G2
M2
M1
M M2
1
G1 G2
Recombination
M2
M1
A
Gene and marker are far apart on same chromosome. If cell gets G1,
then 50% of the time it will get M1 (even number of crossovers) and 50%
of the time it will get M2 (odd number of crossovers). Gene and marker NOTE
are unlinked.
• G1 and G2 are alleles of a
gene to be mapped.
G1 G2 • M1 and M2 are alleles of a
No recombination marker whose locus is known.
M1 M2
G1 G2
M 1 M2
G1 G2
Recombination
M2 M1
B
Gene and marker are close together on the same chromosome. If a cell
gets G1 it is more likely to get M1 also. Gene and marker are linked.
G1 G2
No recombination
M1 M2
(Greater than 50%)
G1 G2
M1 M2
G1 G2 Recombination
M2 M1
(Less than 50%)
C
Figure II 5 3. Gene Mapping by Recombination Frequency with a Marker
Figure II 4 3. Gene Mapping by Recombination Frequency with a Marker Whose Locus Is Known
Whose Locus Is Known
36
Biochemistry
MY
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS LY
MedicalGenetics
High Yield H
Recombination Frequencies and
Gene Mapping MEDIUM YIELD ME
The closer together two linked loci are—for instance, a gene and a marker—the
LOW YIELD
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences lower the recombination frequency will be between them. Therefore, recombina
tion frequency can be used to estimate proximity between a gene and a linked
marker. FUNDAMENTALS FUN
The following example of a family with neurofibromatosis type 1,REINanFORaCuEtoMsoEmNaTl RE
dominant disorder with complete penetrance, illustrates the concept of recombi
nation frequency. Some members of the family have the disease producing allele
of the gene (indicated by phenotype in the pedigree) whose location is to be
determined. Other individuals have the normal allele of the gene.
Each individual has also been typed for his or her allele(s) of a 2 allele marker (1
or 2). Three steps are involved in determining whether linkage exists and, if so,
estimating the distance between the gene and the known marker.
1. Establish linkage phase between the disease producing allele of the gene and
an allele of the marker in the family.
2. Determine if linkage exists between the 2 alleles.
3. If linkage exists, estimate the recombination frequency.
A family in which a mutation causing neurofibromatosis
type 1 is transmitted in 3 generations. The genotype of a
marker locus is shown for each pedigree member.
I
2,2 1,2
II
NOTE 1,1 1,2
A haplotype is the combination of alleles on
a single chromosome. With respect to the III
gene and the marker in Figure II 4 4, 1,1 1,2 1,1 1,1 1,2 1,1
individual II 2 has two haplotypes, AM1 and
aM2, depicted below, where Aand a are
alleles of the gene causing the disease. The Figure FigIIure5 4.II 4Ped4ig.rePeedigree forfor NNeeuurrooffiibbrroommaattoossiiss Type 1Type 1
marker has alleles 1 and 2.
Linkage Phase. The pedigree indicates that the grandmother (I 2) had the
disease producing allele (A) of the gene, which she passed to her daughter (II 2).
A a Is it also possible to determine which allele of the marker was passed from the
M1 M1 grandmother to her daughter? Yes, allele 1. If linkage is present, the disease pro
ducing allele (A) is linked to allele 1 of the marker. We can then designate the
daughter’s 2 haplotypes as AM1/aM2, indicating the chromosomes from her
mother/father respectively.
Determine If Linkage Exists. Are the gene and the marker actually linked as we
hypothesize? Looking at the children in generation III (each representing a meiotic
event in their mother, II 2), we would expect a child who inherited marker allele
1 from the mother to have the disease. The children who inherited allele 2 from
the mother should not have the disease. Examination of the 6 children’s haplo
types shows that this assumption is true in all but one case (III 6). Because the
36
CHAPTER 4 | RECOMBINATION FREQUENCY
AM1 and aM2 haplotypes remain together more than 50% of the time (or, con
versely, are separated by recombination less than 50% of the time), our hypothesis
of linkage is correct.
Estimate the Recombination Frequency. Out of 6 children, there is only one
recombinant (III 6). The estimated recombination frequency in this family is 1/6,
or 17%.
The recombination frequency provides a measure of genetic distance between any
pair of linked loci. This distance is expressed in centimorgans (cM). The centimor
gan is equal to 1% recombination frequency. For example, if two loci show a
recombination frequency of 2%, they are said to be 2 centimorgans apart. Physi
cally, 1 cM is approximately equal to 1 million base pairs of DNA (1 Mb). This NOTE
relationship is only approximate, however, because crossover frequencies are For Linked Loci:
somewhat different throughout the genome, e.g., they are less common near
centromeres and more common near telomeres. • 1 centimorgan (cM) = 1%
recombination frequency
• 1 cM ≈ 1 million base pairs
Determining Recombination Frequency Accurately: LOD Scores
In the previous example, a very small population (6 children, or 6 meiotic events)
was used to determine and calculate linkage, allowing only a very rough estimate
of linkage distance. In fact, there is some small chance that the gene and the
marker are not actually linked at all and the data were obtained by chance. We
could be more confident that our conclusions were correct if we had used a much
larger population. Because families don’t have 100 or 200 children, the next best
approach is to combine data from different families with this same disease to
increase the number of meioses examined. These data can be combined by using
LOD (log of the odds) calculations.
A LOD score, calculated by computer, compares the probability (P) that the data
resulted from actual linkage with a recombination frequency of theta (θ) versus
the probability that the gene and the marker are unlinked (θ = 50%) and that the
data were obtained by chance alone. In the example calculation:
Probability of observing pedigree data if θ = 0.17
Odds =
Probability of observing pedigree data if θ = 0.5
In practice, because 17% might not be the correct number, the computer
calculates these probabilities assuming a variety of recombination frequencies
from θ = 0 (gene and marker are in the same location) to θ = 0.5 (gene and
marker are unlinked). The “odds of linkage” is simply the probability that each
recombination frequency (θ) is consistent with the family data. If data from
multiple families are combined, the numbers can be added by using the log10 of
these odds.
P (linkage at recombination frequency, θ)
Log of the Odds (LOD) = log10
P (unlinked, recombination frequency, 50%)
This equation need not be memorized. These calculations are done by computer
and are displayed as a LOD table that gives the LOD score for each recombination
frequency, θ.
36
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
NOTE Table II 4 1. LOD Scores for a Gene and a Marker
LOD score >3 indicates linkage, while score Recombination 0.01 0.05 0.10 0.20 0.30 0.40
<–2 indicates no linkage. frequency (θ)
BehavioralScience/So T ci o alSc d i e e t n e c rm es ine the recombination frequency: LOD score 0.58 1.89 3.47 2.03 –0.44 –1.20
• First examine the row of LOD scores.
When interpreting LOD scores, the following rules apply:
• The highest LOD score >3 is the
• LOD score >3.00 shows statistical evidence of linkage. (It is 1,000 times
estimate of the recombination
more likely that the gene and the marker are linked at that distance than
frequency.
unlinked.)
• Then examine the row of • LOD score <–2.00 shows statistical evidence of nonlinkage. (It is 100
recombination frequencies. The value times more likely that the gene and the marker are unlinked than linked
directly above the LOD score >3 is at that distance.)
the recombination frequency. • LOD score between –2.00 and 3.00 is indeterminate.
An examination of Table II 4 1 shows that in only one case is there convincing evi
dence for linkage and that score has a recombination frequency of 0.10. Therefore,
the most likely distance between the gene and the marker is a recombination
frequency of 10%, or 10 cM.
If no LOD score on the table is >3.00, the data may be suggestive of linkage, but
results from additional families with the disease would need to be gathered.
Gene mapping by linkage analysis serves several important functions:
• It can define the approximate location of a disease causing gene.
• Linked markers can be used along with family pedigree information for
genetic testing (see Chapter 5). In practice, markers that are useful for
genetic testing must show less than 1% recombination with the gene
involved (be <1 cM distant from the gene).
• Linkage analysis can identify locus heterogeneity.
36
CHAPTER 4 | RECOMBINATION FREQUENCY
Review Questions
Select the ONE best answer.
1. A family with an autosomal dominant disorder is typed for a 2 allele marker,
which is closely linked to the disease locus. Based on the individuals in
Generation III, what is the recombination rate between the disease locus
and the marker locus?
I
1,1 2,2
II
1,2 2,2
III
1,2 2,2 2,2 1,2
A. 0
B. 0.25
C. 0.50
D. 0.75
E. 1.0
F. The marker is uninformative
2. A man who has alkaptonuria marries a woman who has hereditary sucrose
intolerance. Both are autosomal recessive diseases and both map to 3q with
a distance of 10 cM separating the two loci. What is the chance they will
have a child with alkaptonuria and sucrose intolerance?
A. 0%
B. 12.5%
C. 25%
D. 50%
E. 100%
36
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
3. In a family study following an autosomal dominant trait through 3
generations, two loci are compared for their potential linkage to the disease
locus. In the following 3 generation pedigree, shaded symbols indicate the
presence of the disease phenotype, and the expression of ABO blood type
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences and MN alleles are shown beneath each individual symbol.
AO OO
MN NN
AO OO
MN NN
AO AO OO AO OO OO AO
MN MN NN NN MN NN NN
Which of the following conclusions can be made about the linkage of the
disease allele, ABO blood group locus, and MN locus?
A. The ABO and MN alleles are linked, but assort independently from the
disease allele
B. The ABO, MN, and disease alleles all assort independently
C. The disease allele is linked to the ABO locus
D. The disease allele is linked to the ABO and MN loci
E. The disease allele is linked to the MN locus
36
CHAPTER 4 | RECOMBINATION FREQUENCY
Answers
1. Answer: A. In this pedigree, the disease allele is consistently transmitted
with the 1 allele. There is no case in this small number of individuals where
recombination between these two loci has occurred. Therefore, in
Generation III, there is no recombination seen in any of the 4 individuals.
Receiving the one allele always goes together with receiving the disease
gene. Linked markers can be “uninformative” (choice E) in some pedigrees
if, for example, the same alleles are expressed in all family members. In
such a case, it would be impossible to determine any recombination fre
quency.
2. Answer: A. A child will inherit a gene for alkaptonuria from the father and
the normal allele of this gene from the mother. Conversely, the child will
inherit a gene for hereditary sucrose intolerance from the mother and a
normal allele of this gene from the father. The child will therefore be a car
rier for each disease but will not be affected with either one.
3. Answer: C. In this pedigree, the disease locus alleles are segregating with
the ABO blood locus alleles. In each case, individuals who receive the
A allele also receive the disease allele. The MN locus is not linked to the AO
locus because individuals III 4, -5, and -7 are each recombinants between
these loci. The MN locus is not linked to the disease allele because individ
uals III 4, -5, and -7 are each recombinants between these loci.
36

5#
Genetic Diagnosis
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
❏ Understand concepts of direct and indirect genetic diagnosis
❏ Understand concepts of allele specific oligonucleotide and dot blots
GENETIC DIAGNOSIS
Once a gene is identified, the associated genetic disease in at risk individuals can
be diagnosed.
The goal of genetic diagnosis is to determine whether an at risk individual has
inherited a disease causing gene. Genetic diagnosis can be distinguished into 2
types:
HY HY
• Direct diagnosis: the mutation itself is examined
• Indirect diagnosis: linked markers are used to infer whether the indMiY MY
vidual has inherited the chromosome segment containing the disease
LY LY
causing mutation
High Yield HIGH YIELD
Direct Diagnosis
MEDIUM YIELD MEDIUM YIELD
PCR and allele specific oligonucleotide (ASO) probes
LOW YIELD LOW YIELD
ASO probes are short nucleotide sequences that bind specifically to a single allele
of the gene. For example, the most common mutation causing hemochromatosis is
the C282Y mutation that results from a G to A substitution in cFoUdoNnDAMEN2T8A2L.S FUNDAMENTALS
REINFORCEMENT REINFORCEMENT
Codon: 280 281 282 283 284
Normal HFE allele: TAT ACG TGC CAG GTG
↑
C282Y allele: TAT ACG TAC CAG GTG
↑
The ASO for the normal allele would have the sequence
3′ ATA TGC ACG GTC CAC 5′
The ASO for the C282Y allele would have the sequence
3′ ATA TGC ATG GTC CAC 5′
36
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
The 2 ASOs could be used to probe the PCR amplified material on a dot blot.
1 2 3
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
Normal ASO
C282Y ASO
Probe does not react with sample
Probe reacts with sample
Figure FigIIure6 1I.I 5Al1le.leAllele SpSepceifciicfic OliOgolinguocnleuoctliedoetide Probes iPnrobHeesmochromationsisHemochromatosis
The results show that individual 1 is homozygous for the normal HFE allele.
Individual 2 is heterozygous for the normal and C282Y alleles. Individual 3 is
homozygous for the C282Y allele. Only individual 3 would be expected to have
symptoms. Note that this test merely determines genotype, and many consider
ations must be taken into account before predictions about phenotype could be
made. Hemochromatosis has only about 15% penetrance, and in those who do
have symptoms, variable expression is seen.
DNA chips
This approach involves embedding thousands of different oligonucleotides,
representing various mutations and normal sequences, on a silicone chip. Patient
DNA from specific regions is amplified by PCR, tagged with a fluorescent label,
and exposed to the oligonucleotides on the chip. The sites of hybridization on the
chip are recorded by a computer. This approach has the advantages of ready
computerization and miniaturization (hundreds of thousands of oligonucleotides
can be embedded on a single 2 cm2 chip).
37
CHAPTER 5 | GENETIC DIAGNOSIS
Restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis of PCR products
(RFLP PCR)
Occasionally a mutation that creates a disease producing allele also destroys (or
creates in some instances) a restriction enzyme site, as illustrated by the following
case:
A 14 year old girl has been diagnosed with Gaucher disease
(glucocerebrosidase A deficiency), an autosomal recessive disorder of
sphingolipid catabolism. The mutation, T1448C, in this family also affects
an HphI restriction site. PCR amplification of the area containing the
mutation yields a 150 bp product. The PCR product from the normal
allele of the gene is not cut by HphI. The PCR product of the mutant
allele T1448C is cut by HphI to yield 114 and 36 bp fragments. The
PCR product(s) is visualized directly by gel electrophoresis. Based on the
results shown below in Figure II 5 3 using this assay on DNA samples
from this family, what is the most likely conclusion about sibling 2?
Affected
Mother Father female Sibling 1 Sibling 2
150 bp
114 bp
36 bp
Figure Figure II I6I 52.2. PPCCRR andandRFLPRFLfoPr Gauchfoerr GDauiscehaesre Disease
(Ans.: Sibling 2 is also affected)
RFLP diagnosis of myotonic dystrophy
RFLP analysis is also useful in a few cases in which polymorphisms are too large to
conveniently amplify with a PCR. One such case is myotonic dystrophy, in which
the expanded sequence is within the gene region itself (a CTG in the 3′ untrans
lated region). This disease shows anticipation, and family members with a severe
form of myotonic dystrophy may have several thousand copies of this repeat. As
shown in Figure II 5 3, when EcoRI digests are analyzed by Southern blotting, a
probe reveals 9 to 10 kb fragments in unaffected individuals. The size of the
fragment can reach 20 kb in severely affected individuals.
37
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
10 kb
9 kb
Figure II 5 3. EcoRI RFLP Analysis of a Family with Myotonic Dystrophy
Figure II 6 3. EcoRI RFLP Analysis of a Family with Myotonic Dystrophy
Direct DNA sequencing
Sequencing of the entire gene (or at least the exons and the intron–exon boundar
HY
ies) is time consuming and expensive. However, it is sometimes necessary if no
specific set of mutations is responsible for most cases of a disease (e.g., familialMY
breast cancer caused by any of several hundred mutations of the BRCA1 or BRCA2
genes). DNA sequencing is typically done using automated sequencing machines. LY
High Yield H
Indirect Diagnosis
If the mutation causing a disease in a family is not known, indirecMtEDIUMgenetic YIELD ME
analysis can be used to infer whether a parent has transmitted the mutation to his
LOW YIELD
or her offspring. Indirect genetic analysis uses genetic markers that are closely
linked (showing <1% recombination) to the disease locus. The markers are the
same ones used in genetic mapping studies: restriction fragment length polymor
FUNDAMENTALS FUN
phisms (RFLPs), short tandem repeat polymorphisms (STRPs), and single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Because STRPs can have multipRlEeINFORCEaMlleElNesT (with RE
each allele representing a different number of repeats), they are often informative
markers to use.
37
CHAPTER 5 | GENETIC DIAGNOSIS
Indirect genetic diagnosis using STRPs
Suppose there is a 3 generation family in which Marfan syndrome is being
transmitted. Each family member has been typed for a 4 allele STRP that is closely
linked to the disease locus. The affected father in generation I transmitted the
disease causing mutation to his daughter, and he also transmitted allele 3 of the
marker. This allows us to establish linkage phase in this family.
Because of the close linkage between the marker and the disease locus, we can
predict accurately that the offspring in generation III who receive allele 3 from
their mother will also receive the disease causing mutation. Thus, the risk for each
child, instead of being the standard 50% recurrence risk for an autosomal domi
nant disease, is much more definitive: nearly 100% or nearly 0%.
The genotype of a closely linked marker locus is
shown below each individual.
I
1,3 2,4
II
1,2 2,3
III
1,2 2,3 2,2 1,3 2,3
Figure IFIigu6re 4. IIA5T4h.reeThree GGeenneeraratitoionn FamilFyamilyin Whichin Which
Marfan MarfaSnyndromSeyndrome IsIs BBeeiinngg TranTsrmanitstmeditted
Recurrence risks may have to take into account the small chance of recombination
between the marker allele and the disease causing gene. If the STR and the
disease causing gene used in this case show 1% recombination, then the recur
rence risk for a fetus in generation III whose marker genotype is 2,2 would be 1%
rather than 0%. If a fetus in generation III had the marker genotype 2,3, the
recurrence risk for that child would be 99%.
37
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
Indirect genetic testing using RFLPs
If an RFLP is used as a marker for a disease causing gene, the data may be ana
lyzed by using Southern blotting and a probe for the gene region.
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
A man and a woman seek genetic counseling because the woman is 8
weeks pregnant, and they had a previous child who died in the perinatal
period. A retrospective diagnosis of long chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase
(LCAD) deficiency was made based on the results of mass spectrometry
performed on a blood sample. The couple also has an unaffected 4 year
old daughter with a normal level of LCAD activity consistent with
homozygosity for the normal LCAD allele. The parents wish to know
whether the current pregnancy will result in a child with the same rare
condition as the previous child who died. DNA samples from both
parents and their unaffected 4 year old daughter are tested for mutations
in the LCAD gene. All test negative for the common mutations. The
family is then tested for polymorphism at a BamII site within exon 3 of
the LCAD gene by using a probe for the relevant region of this exon. The
RFLP marker proves informative. Fetal DNA obtained by amniocentesis
is also tested in the same way. The results of the Southern blot are shown
below. What is the best conclusion about the fetus?
Father Mother Daughter Fetus
Figure FiguIIre 6 I5I.5R5F.LPRFLP AAnnaallyyssiiss for LfoCrADLCAD
(Answer: Fetus is homozygous for
LCAD mutation and should be clinically affected)
Although RFLP analysis can be used as both an indirect test and a direct test, there
is a significant difference between the two situations.
In the direct test, the mutation causing the disease is the same as the one that alters
the restriction site. There is no distance separating the mutations and no chance
for recombination to occur, which might lead to an incorrect conclusion.
In the indirect assay, the mutation in the restriction site (a marker) has occurred
independently of the mutation causing the disease. Because the mutations are
close together on the chromosome, the RFLP can be used as a surrogate marker
for the disease producing mutation. Linkage phase in each family must be
established. Because the RFLP and the locus of the disease producing mutation are
some distance apart, there is a small chance for recombination and incorrect
conclusions.
37
CHAPTER 5 | GENETIC DIAGNOSIS
RFLP analysis for an X linked disease
Individual II 2 in the family shown below has Lesch Nyhan disease. His
sister, II 4, is pregnant and wants to know the likelihood that her child
will be affected. The mutation in this family is uncharacterized, but is
mapped to a short tandem repeat (STR) located approximately 0.05 cM to
the relevant gene that is informative in this family. DNA from all family
members is obtained. Fetal DNA is obtained by chorionic villus sampling.
What is the best conclusion about the fetus?
I
II
III
Figure IIFig6ure6. RIIFL5P 6. RFALPnalysAisnalysis ooff HHGGPPRRTT DeficienDceyficiencyin a Familyin a Family
(Answer: Fetus (a girl) will not be affected; nor will she
be a carrier because her mother, II 4, is not a carrier)
Direct versus Indirect Genetic Diagnosis
Direct genetic diagnosis is used whenever possible. Its major limitation is that the
disease producing mutation(s) must be known if one is to test for them.
If a family carries a mutation not currently documented, as in the family above
with LCAD deficiency, it will not be detected by direct mutation testing. In these
cases, indirect genetic testing can be used.
Table II 5 1. Features of Indirect and Direct Genetic Diagnosis
Indirect Direct
Diagnosis Diagnosis
Family information needed Yes No
Errors possible because of recombination Yes No
Markers may be uninformative Yes No
Multiple mutations can be assayed with a Yes No
single test
Disease causing mutation itself must be known No Yes
37
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
APPLICATIONS OF GENETIC DIAGNOSIS
Genetic diagnosis is used in a variety of settings, including the ones listed below.
• Carrier diagnosis in recessive diseases
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences
• Presymptomatic diagnosis for late onset diseases
• Asymptomatic diagnosis for diseases with reduced penetrance
• Prenatal diagnosis
• Preimplantation testing
Prenatal Genetic Diagnosis
Prenatal diagnosis is one of the most common applications of genetic diagnosis.
Diagnosis of a genetic disease in a fetus may assist parents in making an informed
decision regarding pregnancy termination and in preparing them emotionally and
medically for the birth of an affected child. There are various types of prenatal
diagnosis.
Amniocentesis
With amniocentesis, a small sample of amniotic fluid (10–20 mL) is collected at
approximately 16 weeks’ gestation. Fetal cells are present in the amniotic fluid and
can be used to diagnose single gene disorders, chromosome abnormalities, and
some biochemical disorders. Elevated α fetoprotein levels indicate a fetus with a
neural tube defect. The risk of fetal demise due to amniocentesis is estimated to be
approximately 1/200.
Chorionic villus sampling
This technique, typically performed at 10–12 weeks’ gestation, involves the
removal of a small sample of chorionic villus material (either a transcervical or a
transabdominal approach may be used). The villi are of fetal origin and thus
provide a large sample of actively dividing fetal cells for diagnosis. This technique
has the advantage of providing a diagnosis earlier in the pregnancy. There is a
small possibility of diagnostic error because of placental mosaicism (i.e., multiple
cell types in the villi). The risk of fetal demise is higher than with amniocentesis
(about 1/100).
Preimplantation diagnosis
Embryos derived from in vitro fertilization can be diagnosed by removing a single
cell, typically from the eight cell stage (this does not harm the embryo). DNA is
PCR amplified and is used to make a genetic diagnosis. The advantage of this
technique is that pregnancy termination need not be considered: only embryos
without the mutation are implanted. There is a possibility of diagnostic error as a
result of PCR amplification from a single cell.
37
CHAPTER 5 | GENETIC DIAGNOSIS
Review Questions
Select the ONE best answer.
1. The pedigree below shows a family in which hemophilia A, an X linked
disorder, is segregating. PCR products for each member of the family are
also shown for a short tandem repeat polymorphism located within an
intron of the factor VIII gene. What is the best explanation for the pheno
type of individual II 1?
I
II
A. Heterozygous for the disease producing allele
B. Homozygous for the disease producing allele
C. Homozygous for the normal allele
D. Incomplete penetrance
E. Manifesting heterozygote
37
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
2. A 22 year old woman with Marfan syndrome, a dominant genetic disorder,
is referred to a prenatal genetics clinic during her tenth week of pregnancy.
Her family pedigree is shown below (the arrow indicates the pregnant
woman). PCR amplification of a short tandem repeat (STR) located in an
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences intron of the fibrillin gene is carried out on DNA from each family member.
What is the best conclusion about the fetus (III 1)?
I
II
III
A. Has a 25% change of having Marfan syndrome
B. Has a 50% chance of having Marfan syndrome
C. Will develop Marfan syndrome
D. Will not develop Marfan syndrome
E. Will not develop Marfan syndrome, but will be a carrier of the disease
allele
37
CHAPTER 5 | GENETIC DIAGNOSIS
3. The pedigree below represents a family in which phenylketonuria (PKU),
an autosomal recessive disease, is segregating. Southern blots for each fami
ly member are also shown for an RFLP that maps 10 million bp upstream
from the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene. What is the most likely explana
tion for the phenotype of II 3?
I
II
A. A large percentage of her cells have the paternal X chromosome carry
ing the PKU allele active
B. Heteroplasmy
C. Male I 2 is not the biologic father
D. PKU shows incomplete penetrance
E. Recombination has occurred
37
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
4. A 14 year old boy has Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD), an X linked
recessive disease. A maternal uncle is also affected. His sisters, aged 20 and
18, wish to know their genetic status with respect to the BMD. Neither the
boy nor his affected uncle has any of the known mutations in the dystro
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences phin gene associated with BMD. Family members are typed for a HindII
restriction site polymorphism that maps to the 5′ end of intron 12 of the
dystrophin gene. The region around the restriction site is amplified with a
PCR. The amplified product is treated with the restriction enzyme HindII
and the fragments separated by agarose gel electrophoresis. The results are
shown below. What is the most likely status of individual III 2?
I
II
III
II 1 II 2 II 3 III 1 III 2 III 3
115 bp
75 bp
40 bp
A. Carrier of the disease producing allele
B. Hemizygous for the disease producing allele
C. Homozygous for the normal allele
D. Homozygous for the disease producing allele
E. Manifesting heterozygote
38
CHAPTER 5 | GENETIC DIAGNOSIS
5. Two phenotypically normal second cousins marry and would like to have a
child. They are aware that one ancestor (great grandfather) had PKU and
are concerned about having an affected offspring. They request ASO testing
and get the following results. What is the probability that their child will be
affected?
Man Woman
ASO Normal allele
ASO Mutant allele
A. 1.0
B. 0.75
C. 0.67
D. 0.50
E. 0.25
6. A 66 year old man (I 2) has recently been diagnosed with Huntington dis
ease, a late onset, autosomal dominant condition. His granddaughter (III 1)
wishes to know whether she has inherited the disease producing allele, but
her 48 year old father (II 1) does not wish to be tested or to have his status
known. The grandfather, his unaffected wife, the granddaughter, and her
mother (II 2) are tested for alleles of a marker closely linked to the
huntingtin gene on 4p16.3. The pedigree and the results of testing are
shown below. What is the best information that can be given to the grand
daughter (III 1) about her risk for developing Huntington disease?
DS2
DS1,
I
DS3
DS3
DS1
II
DS2
DS2
III
DS2
A. 50%
B. 25%
C. Marker is not informative
D. Nearly 100%
E. Nearly 0%
38
Biochemistry
PART II | MEDICAL GENETICS
MedicalGenetics
Answers
1. Answer: A. The female II 1 in this family is heterozygous for the marker
(from the gel) and also has an unaffected father. Her mother is a carrier
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences and the bottom band in the mother’s pattern is associated with the disease
producing allele of the factor VIII gene. All observations are consistent
with II 1 being heterozygous (Xx) for the factor VIII gene. She has no
symptoms, so she is not a manifesting heterozygote (choice E). She cannot
be homozygous for the disease producing allele (choice B) because her
father is unaffected. Homozygosity for the normal allele (choice C) is
inconsistent with the results shown on the gel. She has inherited the chro
mosome from her mother (bottom band) that carries the mutant factor
VIII allele, but from her father she has received a chromosome carrying the
normal allele. Note that her father is not affected, and the bottom band in
his pattern is in linkage phase with the normal allele of the gene. This is a
case where linkage phase is different in the mother and the father.
Incomplete penetrance (choice D) is not a good choice because the female
(II 1) does not have the disease producing genotype. She is heterozygous
for the recessive and (dominant) normal allele. One would expect from her
genotype that she would be unaffected.
2. Answer: C. The blot shows the top band in the patterns of I 1 and II 2 (the
proband) is associated with the disease producing allele. Because the fetus
has inherited this marker allele from the mother (II 2) and Marfan disease
is dominant, the fetus will develop Marfan disease. Choices A and B are
recurrence risks associated with the pedigree data. With no blot to examine,
choice B, 50% risk would be correct. Choice D would be correct if the blot
from the fetal DNA showed both the bottom band (must be from mother)
and the top band (from the unaffected father). Choice E is incorrect
because Marfan is a dominant disease with no “carrier” status.
3. Answer: E. Although II 3 has an RFLP pattern consistent with heterozygos
ity for the PKU allele, she has PKU. The best explanation offered is that
recombination has occurred, and although she is heterozygous for the
restriction site generating the RFLP pattern, she is homozygous for the
mutation causing PKU. The restriction site is 10 million bp upstream from
the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene so there is a minimum chance of
recombination of 10%. Although this is small, it is the most likely of the
options listed. The phenylalanine hydroxylase gene is not on the X chromo
some (choice A). Heteroplasmy (choice B) is associated with mitochondrial
pedigrees, and the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene is a nuclear one. The
RFLP pattern is quite consistent with I 2 being the biologic father (choice
C), and he is a known carrier of the PKU mutation because he has another
affected child (II 1). If II 3’s RFLP pattern showed homozygosity for the
marker (identical to II 1), and she had no symptoms, incomplete pene
trance (choice D) would be a good choice.
38
CHAPTER 5 | GENETIC DIAGNOSIS
4. Answer: C. The disease producing allele of the gene is associated with the
presence of the HindII site. Notice that both affected males show two
smaller bands (75 and 40 bp). II 3, a carrier female, also has these two
smaller bands in her pattern, in addition to a larger PCR product
(115 bp), representing the absence of the HindII site on her normal chro
mosome. III 2 has only the larger PCR product (notice the density
because both chromosomes yielded this product). She is homozygous for
the normal allele. Choice A, carrier, would be correct if her pattern had
looked like those of II 3 and III 1. All the males shown are hemizygous
(choice B) for the dystrophin gene because they have only one copy. II 1
and III 3 are hemizygous for the disease producing allele, and II 2 is
hemizygous for the normal allele. No one in the family is homozygous for
the disease producing allele (choice D). In an X linked pattern, this would
be characteristic of a female with two copies of the disease producing
allele and is very rarely seen. III 2 is not a manifesting heterozygote
(choice E) because she has no symptoms and is not a heterozygote.
5. Answer: E. The blot indicates that both parents are heterozygous for the
mutant allele. Because both are phenotypically normal, the disease must be
autosomal recessive. If it had been X linked recessive, the man would be
hemizygous. Thus, the chance they will have an affected child is 25% (0.25).
6. Answer: A. The affected grandfather has marker alleles DS2 and DS3. There
is no information about which one is in linkage phase with his diseasepro
ducing huntingtin allele. On the basis of the pedigree alone, the daughter
has a 25% chance of inheriting the grandfather’s disease producing hunting
tin allele (choice B); however, she would like more information. Because her
father (II 1) does not wish to be tested or know about his genetic status with
respect to Huntington’s, it is unethical to test the daughter for the triplet
repeat expansion. The results would necessarily reveal the status of her
father also. By doing an indirect genetic test, one can see the daughter has
inherited one of her marker alleles (DS2) from the grandfather via her
father. This means she has a 50% chance of developing Huntington’s because
there is a 50% chance that DS2 is a marker for the disease producing hun
tingtin allele in the grandfather and a 50% chance it is not (and DS3 is).
Notice the result does not reveal additional information about her father
(II 1). Before her testing, he had a 50% chance of having the disease
producing huntingtin allele. His risk is still 50% with the information from
the daughter’s test. However, if the father (II 1) does develop Huntington’s
in the future, that will mean that the daughter has a 100% chance of having
the disease also (choice D).
If her marker status had been DS1/DS1, her chances of developing
Huntington’s would have been near 0 (choice E) because she did not
inherit these alleles from her grandfather. One came from her grand
mother (via her father) and one from her mother. This result still would
not reveal additional relevant information about her father (II 1), whose
risk would remain 50%.
38

Index
Note: Page numbers followed by f and t refer to figures and tables, respectively.
A AIDS patients, measuring viral load in, genetic imprinting in, 316f
110, 110f microdeletions and, 348
AAV (adeno associated viruses), as
Alanine, in gluconeogenesis, 208 Anticipation, in inheritance, 312, 313f,
gene delivery vector, 90, 90t
Alanine cycle, 209 313t
Abetalipoproteinemia, 230–231
Albinism, 265 α1 Antitrypsin deficiency, 60
Absorptive state, metabolic profile for,
Alkaptonuria, 265 Apoprotein B gene, cytosine to uracil
161, 162f
Alcohol deamination in, 42
ACAT (acyl cholesterol acyl
calories per gram, 164 Apoproteins, 223t
transferase), 226f
consumption of, extreme exercise Arachidonic acid, 217
Acetyl CoA, 208
and, 210 Arsenate, 175
in cholesterol synthesis, 231, 231f
metabolism of, 209–210, 210f Arthritis
coordinate regulation by, 209
Alcohol abuse, 210, 220 in alkaptonuria, 265
Acetyl CoA carboxylase, 219, 239
Alcoholism, hypoglycemia and, 209–210 gouty (See Gouty arthritis)
Ackee fruit, 242
Allele frequency, 326 in hemochromatosis, 308
Acne, isotretinoin therapy for, 150
Hardy Weinberg principle and, 328 rheumatoid, 195
Acrocentric chromosomes, 341
sex chromosomes and, 328–329 Ascorbate. See Vitamin C deficiency
Actinomycin, 33t
Alleles, 297 ASO probes. See Allele specific
Active muscle, metabolic fuel patterns
Allele specific oligonucleotide (ASO) oligonucleotide probes
in, 166
probes, 100, 369–370, 370f Aspartame, 265
Acute gouty arthritis, 290
Allelic heterogeneity, 291, 308 Aspartate, 262
Acute intermittent porphyria, 270–271,
α1 antitrypsin deficiency, 60 Aspirin, 195
270f
α1,4 glucosidase, 204 Atherosclerosis, 227–228, 228f
Acute myocardial infarction (AMI), 194
α amanitin, 32 ATM gene, in DNA repair, 25
Acyl cholesterol acyl transferase
α thalassemia, 50 Atorvastatin, 231
(ACAT), 226f
α tocopherol. See Vitamin E ATP
ADA (adenosine deaminase) deficiency,
Amino acid activation, 65 chemical structure of, 6f
290
tRNA and, 51–52, 52f energy for hydrolysis of, 120
Adenine deamination, RNA editing
Amino acid metabolism, 259–275 mitochondrial oxidation and, 239
and, 42
disorders of, 263–266, 264f production of, glycolysis and, 178
Adeno associated viruses (AAV), as
Amino acids Atrial natriuretic factor (ANF), 135, 135f
gene delivery vector, 90, 90t
classification of, 115–116, 116f–117f Autosomal aneuploidy, 342–343
Adenosine deaminase (ADA)
essential, 119, 119t Autosomal dominant diseases, 300
deficiency, 290
glucogenic/ketogenic, 206t incomplete penetrance for, 309, 309f
S Adenosylmethionine (SAM), 267
products derived from, 269t Autosomal dominant inheritance,
Adenoviruses, as gene delivery vector,
protein turnover and, 118–119 299–300, 300f
90, 90t
structure of, 115 disease associated with (See
Adipose tissue, 220
tRNA and, 41–42, 42f, 51–52, 52f Autosomal dominant diseases)
capillaries of, 225
Amino groups, removal and excretion Autosomal recessive inheritance,
GLUT 4 in, 172, 172f
of, 259–261, 260f 300–301, 301f
metabolic fuel patterns in, 164t, 165
Aminotransferases (transaminases), 261 disease associated with, 301
triglyceride lipolysis in, 238f
Amniocentesis, 376 incomplete penetrance for, 309
VLDL metabolism and, 224f
Anaerobic glycolysis, 166, 173, 176, AZT (zidovudine), 23
ADP ribosylation, 139, 140f
178, 179
Aerobic glycolysis, 166, 173, 175, 176,
Andersen disease, 203t B
178
Aneuploidy Bacteria, transcription and translation
Agarose gel electrophoresis, of PCR
autosomal, 342–343 in, 36
products, 106, 106f, 359
Age of onset, disease causing mutations nondisjunction as cause of, 344 Bacterial toxins, ADP ribosylation by,
sex chromosome, 343 139, 140
and, 311–312
Angelman syndrome, 315, 316
385
Immunology
BIOCHEMISTRY AND MEDICAL GENETICS
Biochemistry
Barbiturates, 271 Northern blots, 100t, 103, 103f eukaryotic chromosome replication
Barr body, 303 principles of, 99, 99f during, 19, 19f
Base excision, in DNA repair, 26 probes for, 99, 100, 100t phases in, 4, 4f
Bases, nucleotide, 5, 5f Southern blots, 100t, 101–103, 101f, reverse transcription and, 5
MedicalGeneticschanges in sequence of (See 102f Cell differentiation, control by
Mutations) types of, 100t homeodomain proteins, 78
nomenclature for, 6–7, 7t Western blots, 100t, 104 Centimorgan (cM), 363
BBB (blood brain barrier), lipid soluble Bordetella pertussis, ADP ribosylation CETP (cholesterol ester transfer
bilirubin and, 274 by, 139, 139t protein), 227
BehavioralScience/SocBialSDcNieAnces double helix, 9, 9f BPG. See 2,3 Bisphosphoglycerate CFTR protein, 58
β globin gene, 298 Brain CGD (chronic granulomatous disease),
mRNA mutation, 40, 50 ketogenolysis in, 245, 245f 213
in sickle cell disease, 102, 102f metabolic fuel patterns in, 164t, 167 cGMP second messenger system, 135,
β hydroxybutyrate, in ketosis vs. Branched chain ketoacid 135f
ketoacidosis, 246 dehydrogenase deficiency, 265, 329 Chaperones, molecular, 57
β islet cells, glucose sensing in, 173, BRCA 1 and BRCA 2 genes, in DNA Chargaff’s rules, 9
173f, 177 repair, 25 Chemical energy, capturing, 192
β oxidation BUN (blood urea nitrogen), 263, 263t Chemotherapeutic agents
of fatty acids in mitochondria, 239, cell cycle phases targeted by, 4
240f C tumor lysis syndrome and, 290
of palmitate, 239 CAG repeats, in Huntington disease, Chest pain, ischemic, 194
β thalassemia, 40, 50 312, 313f Chlamydia, purine synthesis and, 288
BH4 (tetrahydrobiopterin, THB), 267 Calcitriol Chloramphenicol, 56
Bile duct occlusion, 275 (1,25 dihydroxycholecalciferol) Cholecalciferol. See Vitamin D
Bilirubin synthesis, 149 Cholesterol
heme catabolism and, 274f Calcium homeostasis, 148 metabolism of, 231–232, 231f
jaundice and, 275 cAMP response element (CRE), 76, regulation in hepatocytes, 226f
lipid soluble, 274 76f synthesis of, 231f
metabolism of, 273 cAMP response element binding Cholesterol digestion, 222
Biochemical reactions, 120–124 (CREB) protein, 74t, 76, 132 Cholesterol ester transfer protein
cooperative enzyme kinetics, 123, cAMP second messenger system, 134, (CETP), 227
124f 134f, 135 Chorionic villus sampling, 376
energy and rate comparisons, 120f, Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase, 262, Chromatin, 11–12, 12f
120t 263 Chromatin remodeling, in eukaryotic
enzyme inhibitors/activators, Carbohydrate (dietary) gene expression regulation, 71–72,
122–123, 122t, 123f calories per gram, 164 72f
Lineweaver Burk equation and plot, digestion of, 171 Chromosomal abnormalities
121, 121f in recommended diet, 164 inversions, 348–349, 349f
Michaelis Menten equation and plot, Carbon monoxide, 194 isochromosome, 350, 350f
120–121, 121f Cardiac muscle, metabolic fuel patterns numerical, 341–344
one carbon units in, 267 in, 164t, 166 ring chromosome, 349, 350f
transport kinetics, 124 Cardioprotection, omega 3 fatty acids structural, 345–347
Biotin, 146t providing, 217 Chromosome banding, 340–341
Biotin deficiency, 208 Carnitine acyltransferase 1 (CAT 1)/ Chromosome replication
propionic acid pathway and, 242, 243f Carnitine palmitoyl transferase 1 eukaryotic and, 18–19, 18f, 19f
Birth, reciprocal translocation after, (CPT 1), 239 prokaryotic and, 18, 18f
346 Carnitine acyltransferase 2 (CAT 2)/ Chromosomes, 297
2,3 Bisphosphoglycerate (BPG) Carnitine palmitoyl transferase 2 abnormal (See Chromosomal
effect on hemoglobin A, 179f (CPT 2), 240f, 241 abnormalities)
glycolysis and, 177 Carotene. See Vitamin A metaphase, 339, 340f
in transfused blood, 179 Carrier, translocation, 345–346 nomenclature for, 341
Bisphosphonates, 149 cDNA structure of, mitosis and, 12
Blood brain barrier (BBB), lipid soluble produced from mRNA, 78f, 88 Chronic gouty arthritis, 290
bilirubin and, 274 uses for, summarized, 96f Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD),
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 263, 263t cDNA (expression) libraries, 89, 89t 213
Blood vessels, in atherosclerosis, Cell cycle Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML),
227–228, 228f chemotherapeutic agents targeting, 4 110, 346
Blotting techniques control of, 5 Chylomicronemia, fasting, 229
Dot (slot) blots, 100t eukaryotic, 4, 4f Chylomicrons, 22, 223–225, 223t, 224
386
INDEX
Ciprofloxacin, 23 Cyclic GMP. See cGMP second Direct DNA sequencing, 372
cis fatty acids, 218 messenger system Direct genetic diagnosis, 369–373, 375t
Cisplatin, 9 Cystic fibrosis, 58 Direct mutation testing, PCR in,
cis regulatory element, 73 in vivo gene replacement therapy for, 108–109, 109f
Citrate shuttle, 219 93, 93f Disease(s)
Citric acid cycle, 189–190, 190f Cytogenetics abnormal G proteins and, 139t
coordinate regulation of, 196 advances in, 351 associated with DNA repair, 26–27
Citrulline, 262 chromosomal abnormalities (See collagen and, 62t, 64t
Cloning DNA Chromosomal abnormalities) single gene (See Single gene diseases)
goal of, 84 definitions and terminology, 339–341, Disease causing mutations
restriction fragments (See Restriction 340f delayed age of onset of, 311–312
fragment cloning) Cytosine deamination penetrance of, 305
steps in, 84, 84f in apoprotein B, 42 Disomy, uniparental, 79, 315
summarized, 96t in DNA repair, 25t, 26, 26f DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid)
uses for cloned genes, summarized, changes in base sequence (See
96f D Mutations)
CML (chronic myelogenous leukemia), dATP/ddATP, 108 denaturation/renaturation of, 10, 10f
110, 346 Daunorubicin, 9 genetic information flow from, 34, 34f
Cobalamin deficiency. See Vitamin B12 ddNTP (dideoxynucleotides), 108 hydrogen bonded base pairs in, 7, 8f
(cobalamin) deficiency Deamination organization of, 10–12, 11f–12f
Codon translation, 51–52, 52f adenine, RNA editing and, 42 polymorphic markers of, 357, 358f
Collagen cytosine, in DNA repair, 25t, 26, 26f (See also individual markers, e.g.:
biosynthesis disorders, 64t cytosine to uracil, 42 RFLPs)
characteristics of, 62t Delayed age of onset, diseases with, structure of, 9, 9f
posttranslational modifications of, 311–312 transcription of, 33–34, 34f
62–63 Deletions DNA chips, in genetic diagnosis, 370
synthesis of, 63f chromosomal, 347–348, 348f DNA gyrase, 22, 23
Colorectal polyposis, hereditary large segment, 49–50 DNA libraries, 89, 89t
nonpolyposis, 26, 27 single gene mutation, 298 DNA ligase, 22, 24f
Competitive enzyme inhibitor, Denaturation, of DNA, 10, 10f DNA polymerases, 20, 20f
122–123, 123f de novo pathways eukaryotic, 22
Consanguinity, 301 cholesterol synthesis, 231, 231f prokaryotic, 22, 24f
health consequences of, 332 nucleotide synthesis, 283, 284f proofreading by, 20t, 21, 22, 26f
pedigree for, 332, 332f purine synthesis, 287–288, 288f RNA dependent, 22
recessive disease and, 332 pyrimidine synthesis, 284, 286, 286f DNA repair, 25–28, 25t
Cooperative enzyme kinetics, 123, 124f Deoxyadenosine triphosphate (dATP), diseases associated with, 26–27
Coordinate regulation 108 genes involved in, 26f
by acetyl CoA, 209 Deoxyguanosine monophosphate tumor suppressor genes and, 25
of citric acid cycle and oxidative (dGMP), chemical structure of, 6f DNA replication, 17–19, 18f, 19f
phosphorylation, 196 Deoxyribonucleic acid. See DNA and gene expression compared, 3–5,
of pyruvate carboxylase/pyruvate DHAP. See Dihydroxyacetone 4t
dehydrogenase, 209 phosphate steps in, 21–24, 23t, 24f
Cori cycle, 163f, 209 DHF (dihydrofolate), 267, 268f DNA sequencing
Cori disease, 203t DHFR (dihydrofolate reductase), 287t direct, 372
Cortisol, 75f, 76 Diabetes for direct mutation testing, 108–109,
Co translational modifications, hyperlipidemia secondary to, 230 109f
covalent, 61–62 ketoacidosis in, 245 DNA synthesis, 20, 20f
Cotrimoxazole, 286 ketone body generation in, 244 See also S phase, in cell cycle
C peptide, 177 Dicumarol, 156 RNA synthesis vs., 20t, 21
CRE (cAMP response element), 76, Dideoxynucleotides (ddNTP), 108 dNTP/ddNTP, 108
76f Diet, recommended, 164 Dominant (gene mutation), 297
CREB protein. See cAMP response DiGeorge syndrome, 348 Double bonds, in fatty acids, 218
element binding protein Dihydrofolate (DHF), 267, 268f Double helix, 9f
Cri du chat, 50 Dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), 287t B DNA, 9, 9f
Crossover/Crossing over Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP), Down syndrome, 342
(recombination mapping), 50, 268 172, 177, 237 maternal age and, 344
Cyanide, 194 1,25 Dihydroxycholecalciferol Robertsonian translocation and, 347,
Cyanocobalamin (B12), 146t (calcitriol) synthesis, 149 347t
Cyclic AMP. See cAMP Diploid cells, 297, 341 Doxorubicin, 9
38
Immunology
BIOCHEMISTRY AND MEDICAL GENETICS
Biochemistry
E Erythropoietin, as recombinant protein Fatty acid(s)
product, 90t activation of, 218
EcoRI restriction endonuclease, 86, 86f
Escherichia coli, ADP ribosylation by, biosynthesis of, 218–220, 219f
in RFLP analysis of myotonic
139, 139t double bonds in, 218
dystrophy, 371, 372f
MedicalGenetEicdsward syndrome, 342 Escherichia coli heat stable toxin (STa), nomenclature of, 217–218
135 unsaturated, 217
EF. See Elongation step, in translation
Essential amino acids, 119, 119t Fatty acid oxidation, 239–243
Ehlers Danlos (ED) syndromes, 64, 64t
ETC. See Electron transport chain genetic deficiencies of, 240f, 241
Electron shuttles, in glycolysis, 174f, 178
Euchromatin, 11–12, 12f Fatty acid synthase, 219–220
Electron transport chain (ETC), 191,
BehavioralScience/SocialSciences Eukaryotic cell cycle, 4, 4f Fatty acylcarnitine, 239
191f, 192
chromosome replication during, 19, Fatty acyl transferase, 239
chemical energy and, 192
19f Fatty streaks, in blood vessels, 227, 228f
inhibitors of, 194–195
Eukaryotic cells Favism, 213
oxidative phosphorylation and, 192f,
co expression of genes in, 78 Febuxostat, 291
193–194
DNA and RNA in, 7 Ferritin, 273
tissue hypoxia and, 194
DNA packaging in, 11, 11f, 12f Ferrochelatase (heme synthase), 271, 272
Elongation step (EF), in translation,
DNA replication in, 22, 23t Ferroxidase, 272
54f, 55
Eukaryotic chromosome replication, Fibrates, 75
summarized, 65t
18–19, 18f, 19f Fibrous cap, plaque development and,
Embryos
Eukaryotic gene expression, regulation 228, 228f
cell differentiation control in, 78
of, 71–79, 79t Five carbon sugars, 5
preimplantation genetic diagnosis
Eukaryotic messenger RNA, 38–40, Fluorescence in situ hybridization
for, 376
39f, 40f (FISH), 351
Endocytosis, 226
Eukaryotic ribosomes, 41, 41f Fluoroquinolones, 23
Endonucleases, 18
Eukaryotic RNA polymerases, FMR1 gene expression, 103, 103f
Endothelial dysfunction, in
32, 33t Foam cells, 227, 228f
atherosclerosis, 227
Euploid cells, 341 Folate deficiency
Energy
Euploidy, 341–342 cobalamin deficiency vs., 269t
in chemical reaction, 120, 120f
Exercise, alcohol consumption and, orotic aciduria and, 285
hydrolysis in ATP/GTP and, 120
210 Folate metabolism, 267, 268f
metabolic (See Metabolic energy)
Exonucleases, 18 Folic acid, 146t
Enhancers, 72f, 73, 73f
Expression libraries. See cDNA Founder effect, 329
Environmental influences, single gene
(expression) libraries Fragile X syndrome, 51t, 103, 305
diseases and, 308
ex vivo, defined, 90 anticipation for, 313t
Enzyme(s)
ex vivo gene replacement therapy, 92, Frameshift mutations, 49, 49f, 298
See also specific enzymes
92f Friedreich ataxia, 51t, 314
genetic deficiencies in glycogen
for X linked severe combined anticipation for, 313t
metabolism, 203–205
immunodeficiency, 94f Fructokinase, 182
HGPRT, purine catabolism and, 289,
Fructose
289f
F deficiency, 182
for pyrimidine synthesis, 287t
Fabry disease, 249 hereditary intolerance to, 183
in sphingolipid catabolism, genetic
deficiencies, 248–249, 248t Factor VIII, as recombinant protein metabolism of, 182, 182f
product, 90t Fructose 1,6 bisphosphatase, 208
water soluble vitamins and, 145,
146t–147t FADH2, 191 Fructose 1 phosphate aldolase, 182
Enzyme activators, 123, 123f mitochondrial oxidation and, 239
G
Enzyme inhibitors Familial cancer, incomplete penetrance
drugs as, 122 in, 310 G0 phase, in cell cycle, 4, 4f, 11
effects of, 122, 122t, 123f Family history, pedigree nomenclature, G1 (gap 1) phase, in cell cycle, 4, 4f, 11
Enzyme kinetics, cooperative, 123, 124f 299f G2 (gap 2) phase, in cell cycle, 4, 4f
Farnesyl pyrophosphate, 231f, 232 G6PDH. See Glucose 6 phosphatase
Enzyme linked immunosorbent assay
Fasting Gain of function mutation, 298
(ELISA), 109–110
ketogenolysis in brain during, 245, Galactokinase, 181
Enzyme replacement therapy, 249
Epidermal growth factor, as 245f Galactose 1 phosphate
ketosis in, 246 uridyltransferase, 181
recombinant protein product, 90t
mitochondrial oxidation in, 239 Galactose metabolism, 180–181, 180f
Epithelium maintenance, vitamin A
prolonged (See Starvation [prolonged Galactosemia, 181
for, 150
Erythrocytes fast] state) Gametes, 297
glycolysis in, 178–179, 179f Fasting chylomicronemia, 229 γ carboxylation, 62
Fat, in recommended diet, 164 vitamin K dependent, 153–154, 154
role of HMP shunt in, 212f
388
INDEX
Gaucher disease, 248t, 249 Gluconeogenesis, 206–210, 207f GRE. See Glucocorticoid response
PCR and RFLP for, 371, 371f control of, by response elements, element
G banding, 340, 340f 76–77, 76f Growth factor, as recombinant protein
Gene(s), 297–298 in lipid mobilization, 237, 238f product, 90t
See also specific genes Glucose, genetic expression of insulin GTP, in translation process, 53, 55
cloned, uses summarized, 96t gene and, 173
co expression of, 78 Glucose 6 phosphatase (G6PDH) H
delivery vectors for, 90–94, 91f–94f, deficiency (von Gierke disease), 203t, Haploid cells, 341
91t 204, 213 Haplotype, 362
linkage of markers and, 360, 361f in gluconeogenesis, 208 Hardy Weinberg equilibrium, 326–327
working definition of, 3 Glucose transport, 172, 172f, 173f, for dominant diseases, 328
Gene expression 173t in PKU, 327
and DNA replication compared, overview, 171 practical application of, 327–328
3–5, 4t palmitate synthesis from, 219f HDL (high density lipoprotein), 223t,
embryonic, regulatory proteins in, 78 α1,4 Glucosidase, 204 225–227
in eukaryotic cells, regulation of, GLUT 1, 172, 173t atherosclerosis and, 227, 228, 228f
71–79, 79t GLUT 2, 172, 173f, 173t Heme
profiling of (microarrays), 103 GLUT 3, 172, 173t catabolism of, bilirubin and, 274f
Gene flow, 332 GLUT 4, 172, 172f, 173t synthesis of, 269, 270f
Gene mapping, recombination Glutamate dehydrogenase, 261 Heme synthase (ferrochelatase), 271, 272
frequency and, 363–364, 364t Glutaminase, 261 Hemizygotes, 301
Gene replacement therapy, 90 Glutamine, in blood, 263, 263t Hemochromatosis, 272
challenges to, 94 Glutamine synthetase, 261 ASO probes for mutations causing,
delivery vectors, 90–94, 90t, 91f–94f Glyceraldehyde 3 phosphate 369–370, 370f
Genetic analysis techniques dehydrogenase, 175 hereditary, 308–310
blotting techniques, 99–104 Glycerol 3 phosphate, 221f Hemoglobin A, effect of
polymerase chain reaction, 104–106 triglyceride synthesis and, 220 2,3 bisphosphoglycerate on, 179f
Genetic code, 48, 48f Glycerol kinase, 220 Hemoglobinopathy, 118
summarized, 65t Glycerol phosphate shuttle, 178 Hemolytic anemia, 274
Genetic diagnosis Glycerophospholipids, 221, 221f Hemolytic crisis, 275
applications of, 376 Glycogenesis, 201 Hemosiderin, 272, 273
direct, 369–373, 375t Glycogen granule, 201, 201f Hepatic glycogen phosphorylase
indirect, 369, 372–375, 375t Glycogen metabolism, 202f deficiency (Hers disease), 203t, 205
prenatal, 376 genetic deficiencies of enzymes in, Hepatic steatosis, alcohol abuse and,
Genetic drift, 330–331, 331f 203–205 210, 220
Genetic fingerprinting, 107–108, 107f Glycogenolysis, 201–203 Hepatitis B vaccine, as recombinant
Genetic imprinting, in Prader Willi Glycogen phosphorylase, 203, 203t protein product, 90t
syndrome, 79 Glycogen storage diseases, 203t, Hepatocytes
Genetic mosaicism, 303, 343 204–205 cholesterol regulation in, 225–226, 226f
Genetic regulation, 71 Glycogen synthase, 202, 202t role of HMP shunt in, 212f
eukaryotic, 71–79, 79t Glycogen synthesis, 201–202 Hereditary fructose intolerance, 183
Genetic testing, RFLPs in, 102–103, Glycolysis, 173, 174f, 175 Hereditary hemochromatosis, 308–310
102f ATP production and, 178 ASO probes in, 369–370, 370f
Genetic variation, evolutionary factors electron shuttles in, 174f, 178 Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal
for, 329 enzymes in, 175–176 cancer (HNPCC), 26, 27
Genomic libraries, 88, 89t in erythrocyte, 178–179, 179f Hers disease, 203t, 205
Genotype, 297, 298 intermediates of, 175, 177 Heterochromatin, 11–12, 12f
Genotype frequency, 325–326, 325t irreversibility of, 177 Heterogeneity
Glucagon overview, 171 allelic, 291, 308
in gluconeogenesis control, 75f, 76, Glycosylation, 60, 61 locus, 310–311
76f Gout, 290 Heterogeneous nuclear RNA (hnRNA),
insulin and, functional relationship Gouty arthritis 32, 40
between, 138, 138f acute/chronic, 290 Heteroplasmy, 307, 308
Glucocorticoid response element in Lesch Nyhan syndrome, 291 Heterozygotes, 297
(GRE), 76, 76f, 77 G protein(s), 133, 133f manifesting (female), 304
Glucogenic amino acids, 206t abnormal, diseases associated with, Hexokinase, 175, 175t
Glucokinase, 175 139t Hexose monophosphate (HMP) shunt,
GLUT 2 and, 173f in signal transduction, 139 211–213, 211f
hexokinase vs., 175t Gray baby syndrome, 56 role of, 212f
38
Immunology
BIOCHEMISTRY AND MEDICAL GENETICS
Biochemistry
HGPRT enzyme Hypercholesterolemia, 232 Introns, 38–40, 39f
deficiency, RFLP analysis of, 375, treatment of, 231 Inversions, chromosomal, 348–349,
375f type IIa (LDL receptor deficiency), 349f
purine catabolism and, 289–291, 289f 230 in vitro fertilization, preimplantation
MedicalGenetHicGsPRT gene, mutations in, 291 Hyperlipidemias, 229–231 genetic diagnosis and, 376
High altitude, adaptation to, 179 primary, types of, 229f in vivo, defined, 90
High density lipoprotein. See HDL secondary to diabetes, 230 in vivo gene replacement therapy, 92,
High fructose drinks, 182 Hypertriglyceridemia, 75 92f
Histones, 11 type I, 229 for cystic fibrosis, 93, 93f
BehavioralScience/SocHiaIlVSciencteessting, 109–110, 110f Hyperuricemia, 290 Iron (Fe3+)
HMG CoA reductase. See 3 Hydroxy Hypobetalipoproteinemia, 230–231 deficiency in, 271, 272t
3 methylglutaryl (HMG) CoA Hypoglycemia metabolism of, 273f
reductase alcoholism and, 209–210 transport and storage of, 272–273
HNPCC (hereditary nonpolyposis lipolysis of triglyceride in response to, Ischemia, fatty streaks and, 227
colorectal cancer), 26, 27 237, 238f Ischemic chest pain, 194
Hogness box, 38 Hypolipidemias, 230–231 Isochromosome, 350, 350f
Holoprosencephaly (HPE), 62 Isotretinoin, contraindications for use,
Homeobox (HOX) genes, 78 I 150
Homeodomain proteins, 74, 74t I cell disease, 61
cell differentiation in utero and, 78 IDL (intermediate density lipoprotein), J
Homocysteinemia, 266 223, 223t, 225 Jaundice, 275
Homocystinuria, 266 in fatty streak formation, 228f
Homogentisate oxidase deficiency IF. See Initiation step, in translation K
(alkaptonuria) 265 Ig heavy chain locus, 73 Karyotype, 339, 340f
Homologous chromosomes, 297 125I labeled probe antibodies, 100, 104 symbols used in nomenclature for,
Homozygote, 297 Imprinting, 314–315, 316f 341t
Hormones Indirect genetic diagnosis, 369, Karyotyping, spectral, 351
classes of, 131, 132t 372–375, 375t Kernicterus, 274
lipid soluble, 140 Inflammation, in atherosclerosis, 227 Ketoacid dehydrogenase. See Branched
paracrine, 131 In frame mutation, 298 chain ketoacid dehydrogenase
and signal transduction, 131 Inheritance deficiency
telecrine, 131 anticipation in, 312, 313f, 313t Ketoacidosis, 245–246
water soluble (See Water soluble autosomal dominant, 299–300, 300f Ketogenesis, 244, 244f
hormones) autosomal recessive, 300–301, 301f Ketogenic amino acids, 206t
Hormone sensitive lipase (HSL), mitochondrial, 307, 307f Ketogenolysis, 244–245, 244f, 245f
activation of, 237, 238f X linked dominant, 305, 306f Ketone body metabolism, 243–246,
HOX (homeobox) genes, 78 X linked recessive, 301–304, 302f, 244f, 245f
HPE (holoprosencephaly), 62 304f Ketones, measurement of, 246
HSL (hormone sensitive lipase), Initiation step (IF), in translation, 54f, Ketosis, 246
activation of, 237, 238f 55 Kidney, removal and excretion of
Human Genome Project, 85–88 summarized, 65t amino groups in, 259, 260f
huntingtin genes, 312 Insertions, single gene mutation Klein Waardenburg syndrome, 78
Huntington disease, 51 nomenclature for, 298 Klinefelter syndrome, 343
anticipation phenomenon for, 312, “ in” suffix, compounds with, 270, 270f Km (enzyme affinity measure), 121
313f, 313t Insulin Kwashiorkor, marasmus vs., 119
delayed age of onset in, 312 β oxidation and, 239
Hydrogen bonded base pairs, in DNA, glucagon and, functional relationship L
7, 8f between, 138, 138f
Lactase deficiency, 180, 181
Hydrophilic amino acids, 115–116, 117f glucose transport and, 172, 172f Lactate dehydrogenase, 176
Hydrophobic amino acids, 115, 116f potassium levels and, 246 Lactose intolerance, 181
3 Hydroxy 3 methylglutaryl (HMG) as recombinant protein product, 90t Lactulose, 259
CoA reductase, 231f, 232 Insulin receptor, 136–137, 137f Lagging strand synthesis, in DNA
inhibitors, 231 Intermediate density lipoprotein. replication, 21–22, 24f
β Hydroxybutyrate, in ketosis vs. See IDL Large segment deletions, 49–50
ketoacidosis, 246 Interphase, in cell cycle, 4, 4f
LCAD (long chain acyl CoA
Hydroxymethylbilane synthase chromatin types in, 11, 12f dehydrogenase), RFLP analysis for,
deficiency, 270–271, 270f Interphase nucleus, 12, 12f 374, 374f
Hydroxyproline, 62 Intestines, removal and excretion of LCAT. See Lecithin cholesterol
Hyperammonemia, 263, 263t, 285 amino groups in, 259, 260f acyltransferas
390
INDEX
LDL (low density lipoprotein), 223t, LPLase (lipoprotein lipase), 223 Mevalonate, 231f, 232
225–226 Lynch syndrome, 26, 27 Microarrays (gene expression
atherosclerosis and, 227–228, 228f Lysosomal enzymes, 61 profiling), 103
oxidation of, 228 and mannose phosphorylation, 61 Microdeletions, chromosomal, 348
type II hypercholesterolemia and Lysosomal proteins, synthesis of, 59f Microsatellite(s), 27, 359
receptors for, 230 Lysosomal α1,4 glucosidase deficiency instability of, 27
Leading strand synthesis, in DNA (Pompe disease), 203t, 204 sequence (See Short tandem repeats
replication, 21–22, 24f Lysosomes, 61 [STRs])
Lead poisoning, 272, 272t Minisatellites, 359
Leber hereditary optic neuropathy, 307 M Mismatched base, in DNA repair, 25,
Lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase Macrophages, in atherosclerosis, 227, 25t, 26f
(LCAT), 227, 228, 228f 228f Missense mutations, 49f, 298
Leigh syndrome, 193 Malaria, 330 enzyme affinity and, 121
Lesch Nyhan disease, 283, 290–291 Malate shuttle, 178 Mitochondria
RFLP analysis for, 374, 374f Malic enzyme, 219 β oxidation in, 239, 240f
Levofloxacin, 23 Malonyl CoA, 239 electron transport chain and, 193,
Lineweaver Burk equation and plot, Manifesting heterozygotes, 304 193f
122, 122f Mannose phosphorylation, 61 fatty acid entry into, 239, 240f
enzyme inhibition and, 122–123, 123f Maple syrup urine disease, 265, 329 Mitochondrial diseases, 307, 307f
Linkage analysis Marasmus, kwashiorkor vs, 119 Mitochondrial DNA, 10
gene mapping and, 360–364, 361f Marfan syndrome Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy,
polymorphic markers, 357, 358f, 359 indirect genetic diagnosis in, 373, lactic acidosis, and stroke like
Linkage phase, gene mapping and, 362 373f episodes (MELAS), 307
Linked genes and markers, 360, 361f pleiotropy in, 310 Mitochondrial inheritance, 307, 307f
Linoleic acid, 217 Maternal age, Down syndrome risk Mitosis (M phase), in cell cycle, 4, 4f
Linolenic acid, 217 and, 344 chemotherapeutic agents targeting, 4
Lipid digestion, 218 MCAD (medium chain acyl CoA chromosome structure and, 12
Lipid mobilization, 237, 238f dehydrogenase) deficiency, 240f, MLH1 gene
Lipid soluble hormones, 131, 132t, 140 241, 242 in DNA repair, 26f
Lipid soluble vitamins, 148, 148t McArdle disease, 203t, 205 in HNPCC, 27
Lipolysis, of triglycerides, 237, 238f Megaloblastic anemia, 285 Molecular biology, principles of, 3–5,
Lipoprotein(s) Meiosis, nondisjunction during, 344 3f, 4f
classification of, 223t MELAS (mitochondrial Molecular chaperones, 57
metabolism of, 222 encephalomyopathy, lactic Molecular cytogenetics, advances in,
Lipoprotein lipase (LPLase), 223 acidosis, and stroke like episodes), 351
Liver 307 Monocytes, in atherosclerosis, 227, 228f
damage to, bilirubin and, 275 Membrane proteins, synthesis of, 59f Mosaicism, 303
glycogen phosphorylase in, 203t Menkes disease, 64, 64t, 65t in Turner syndrome, 343
glycogen synthase in, 202t Messenger RNA (mRNA), 32 Moxifloxacin, 23
metabolic fuel patterns in, 164–165, base pairing of aminoacyl tRNA and M phase. See Mitosis, in cell cycle
164t codon in, 51–52 mRNA. See Messenger RNA
removal and excretion of amino cDNA produced from, 88, 88f MSH2 gene
groups in, 259, 260f eukaryotic, 38–40, 39f, 40f in DNA repair, 26f
triglyceride lipolysis in, 238f prokaryotic, 36–37, 37f in HNPCC, 27
urea cycle in, 262–263, 262f Metabolic energy Muscle
Locus( -i), 297 sources of, 159, 160f metabolic fuel patterns in, 164t, 166
heterogeneity of, 310–311 storage of, 160 skeletal (See Skeletal muscle)
imprinting and, 314–315, 316f Metabolic fuel Mutations, 49–50, 49f
linked, 363 dietary recommendations, 164 disease causing (See Disease causing
modifier, 308 energy from, 159, 160f mutations)
LOD (log of the odds) scores, patterns of use, in tissue, 164–166, effects of, on protein structure, 49
recombination frequency and, 164t genetic variation in/among
363–364, 364t regulation of, 160–161, 162f–163f populations and, 329
interpretation rules, 364 Metacentric chromosomes, 341 HGPRT gene, 291
Long chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase Metaphase chromosomes, 339, 340f large segment deletions, 49–50
(LCAD), RFLP analysis for, 374, Methanol poisoning, 123 new, 311, 311f
374f Methotrexate, as enzyme inhibitor, 122 PCR in direct mutation testing,
Loss of function mutation, 298 Methylmalonyl CoA mutase, 242, 243f 108–109, 109f
Low density lipoprotein. See LDL deficiency, 265–266 in SHH gene, 78
39
Immunology
BIOCHEMISTRY AND MEDICAL GENETICS
Biochemistry
Mutations (Continued) Nucleotide excision, in DNA repair, 25, PDH. See Pyruvate dehydrogenase
single gene, 298 26, 26f 32P DNA probe, 100t, 103
in splice sites, 40, 50 Nucleotides Pedigree, 299
summarized, 65t chemical structure of, 6, 6f for autosomal dominant inheritance,
MedicalGeneticstrinucleotide repeat expansion, classification of, 5 300f
50, 51t nomenclature for, 6–7, 7t for autosomal recessive inheritance,
Myoclonic epilepsy, 307 synthesis of, 283, 284f 301f
Myopathic CAT 2/CPT 2 deficiency, Numerical chromosome abnormalities, for consanguineous union, 332, 332f
240f, 241 341–344 determining inheritance mode in,
BehavioralScience/SocMiayloSpchieonscpehsorylase deficiency 306f
(McArdle disease), 203t, 205 O in Marfan syndrome, 373, 373f
Myotonic dystrophy, 51t “ ogen” suffix, compounds with, 270, for mitochondrial diseases, 307, 307f
anticipation for, 313t 270f mode of inheritance in, decision tree
EcoRI RFLP analysis of, 371, 372f O glycosylation, 60 for, 306f
Okazaki fragments, 21, 22, 23t, 24f for neurofibromatosis type 1,
N Omega 3 fatty acids, cardioprotective 362–363, 362f
NADH, 146t effects of, 217 new mutation in, 311, 311f
cytoplasmic, in glycolysis, 178 Omega (v) numbering system, fatty nomenclature for, 299f
in electron transport chain, 191, 191f acids, 217 for X linked dominant inheritance,
mitochondrial oxidation and, 146t Oncogenes, translocations involving, 305, 305f
NADPH, 146t 346 for X linked recessive inheritance,
in HMP shunt, 211, 212f One carbon units, 267 301–302, 302f
Nalidixic acid, 22 Ornithine transcarbamoylase, 263 Penetrance
Natural selection, 329–330 Orotic aciduria, 263t, 285 of disease causing mutations, 305
Neurodegenerative disease, direct Osteogenesis imperfecta, 64t incomplete, in single gene diseases,
genetic diagnosis of, 106, 106f locus heterogeneity in, 311 309–310, 309f
Neurofibromatosis type 1, pedigree for, Oxidation PEP (phosphoenolpyruvate), in
362–363, 362f fatty acid (See Fatty acid oxidation) glycolysis, 176, 177
N glycosylation, 60 LDL, vitamin E role in, 228 PEPCK. See Phosphoenolpyruvate
Niacin (B3), 146t, 147, 237 Oxidative phosphorylation, 192f, carboxykinase
NIDDM (non insulin dependent 193–194 Peptide bond formation, during
diabetes mellitus), 245 coordinate regulation of, 196 translation, 53, 53f, 55
Niemann Pick disease, 248t Oxidized compounds, 270, 270f Peptidyl transferase, in translation, 55
Nitric oxide (NO), 135, 135f Oxygen (O2) Pericentric inversion, chromosomal,
Nitrogen, elimination from body, 259, in electron transport chain, 191, 191f 348–349, 349f
260f reactive species, 194–195 Peroxisome(s), 75
Nitrogen balance, 119 Peroxisome proliferator activated
Noncompetitive enzyme inhibitor, P receptors (PPARs), 74t, 75
122–123, 123f p53 activity, in DNA repair, 25, 26f PFK 1 and PFK 2
Non insulin dependent diabetes Paired box (PAX) genes, 78 (phosphofructokinases), 175
mellitus (NIDDM), 245 Palindromes, DNA sequences, 85f, 86, Phagocytes, role of HMP shunt in, 212f
Nonsense mutations, 49f, 298 86f Phenotype, 298
N terminal signal sequence, 60 Palmitate, 217 Phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency.
Nuclear factor kappa B (NFkB), 74t β oxidation of, 239 See Phenylketonuria (PKU)
Nucleases, 18 synthesis of, 219f, 220 Phenylketonuria (PKU), 265
Nucleic acids, 7–10, 8f–10f Pantothenic acid, 147t Hardy Weinberg equilibrium in, 327
See also DNA; RNA Paracentric inversion, chromosomal, Philadelphia chromosome, 346
base sequence, writing of, 7 348 Phosphatases, 132
bases in, 5, 5f Paracrine hormones, 131 Phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate
classification of, 5 Parasites (PIP2) second messenger system,
and nucleotide structure, 5, 6, 6f and G6PDH deficiency, 213 134, 134f
Nucleofilament structure, in eukaryotic purine synthesis and, 288 Phosphodiesterases (PDEs), 135
DNA, 11, 11f Parkinson’s disease, 267 Phosphodiester (PDE) bonds, 18
Nucleosides Patau syndrome, 343 Phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP), in
chemical structure of, 6 Paternity testing, 107–108, 107f glycolysis, 176, 177
classification of, 5 PAX (paired box) genes, 78 Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
nomenclature for, 6–7, 7t PCR. See Polymerase chain reaction (PEPCK), 132, 140
Nucleosome structure, in eukaryotic PDE (phosphodiester) bonds, 18 in gluconeogenesis control, 76–77,
DNA, 11, 11f PDEs (phosphodiesterases), 135 76f, 20
392
INDEX
Phosphofructokinases (PFK 1 and Pregnancy loss Punnett square. See Recurrence risk
PFK 2), 175 reciprocal translocation and, 346 Purine(s), 5, 5f
3 Phosphoglycerate kinase, 176 trisomy and, 343 catabolism of, 289–291, 289f
Phosphorylation, 61 Preimplantation genetic diagnosis, 376 synthesis of, 283, 287–288, 288f
substrate, 176 Pre mRNA, eukaryotic Pyridoxine. See Vitamin B6
PIP2 (phosphatidylinositol alternative splicing of transcripts, 40, Pyrimidine(s), 5, 5f
bisphosphate) second messenger 40f catabolism of, 287
system, 134, 134f production of, 38–40, 39f synthesis of, 263, 283–287, 286f, 287t
PKU. See Phenylketonuria Prenatal genetic diagnosis, 376 Pyruvate carboxylase
Plaque, in blood vessels, 227, 228f Prenylation, 62 coordinate regulation of, 209
Plasmodium sp., 213 Pribnow box, 36 in gluconeogenesis, 208
Pleiotropy, 310 Probability, of events, 327 Pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH),
Point mutations, 49, 49f Proband, 299 183–184, 184f
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 99, Probes coordinate regulation of, 209
104, 105f allele specific oligonucleotide, 100, Pyruvate kinase, 176
agarose gel electrophoresis and, 106, 369–370, 370f deficiency in, 179
106f, 359 blotting techniques and, 99, 100, 101f
allele specific oligonucleotide probes in FISH, 351 Q
and, 369–370, 370f, 371f 32P DNA, 100t, 103 Quinolones, 22, 23
in direct mutation testing, 108–109, Prokaryotic cells, 10
109f DNA replication in, 22, 23t, 24f R
genetic fingerprinting using, 107–108, Prokaryotic chromosome replication,
Ragged red fibers, 307
107f 18, 18f
Rate, of chemical reaction, 120, 120f
in HIV testing, 109–110, 110f Prokaryotic DNA polymerases, 22, 24f
Michaelis Menten equation and plot,
reverse transcriptase, 110, 110f Prokaryotic messenger RNA, 36–37, 37f
120–121, 121f
uses for, 104 Prokaryotic ribosomes, 36, 41, 41f RBCs. See Red blood cells
Polymerases, 18 Prokaryotic RNA polymerases, 32, 33t
Rb gene, in DNA repair, 25, 26f
compared, 20t Prokaryotic topoisomerases, 22, 23
Recessive (gene mutation), 297
in DNA and RNA synthesis, 20–21, 20f Prolonged fast. See Starvation state
Reciprocal translocation, 345–346
Polymorphic markers, 357–359, 358f Propionic acid pathway, 242, 243f
after birth, 346
linkage of genes and, 360, 361f Propionyl CoA carboxylase, 242, 243f
pregnancy loss and, 346
Polymorphism, 297–298 deficiency, 265–266
Recombinant DNA technology, 83–84,
Polysomes, 56 Proteasomes 84f
Pompe disease, 203t, 204 molecular chaperones and, 57
medical applications of, 89–96
Population genetics ubiquitin and, 58, 58f
protein products of, 90, 90t
defined, 325 Protein (dietary)
summarized, 96t
genotype and allele frequencies calories per gram, 164
Recombinant plasmids, 87f
in, 325–326 (See also Allele in recommended diet, 164
Recombinant proteins, 90, 90t
frequency; Genotype frequency) Protein(s)
Recombination frequency, 357–364
Hardy Weinberg equilibrium and, in DNA replication, 21, 22, 23t
gene mapping and, 361f, 362–363
326–327 gene region codes for, 37f
Recombination mapping, 360–363, 361f
variation in, evolutionary factors genetic information flow from DNA
Recurrence risk, 298–299
responsible for, 329–331 to, 34, 34f
for autosomal dominant diseases, 300,
Porphobilinogen deaminase deficiency, prokaryotic mRNA and, 36, 37f
300f
270–271, 270f regulatory, in eukaryotic gene
for autosomal recessive diseases, 301,
Porphyria cutanea tarda, 270f, 271 expression, 74t, 79t
301f
Porphyrias, 270–271, 270f targeting of, 59f, 60, 65t
for X linked dominant diseases, 305,
Postabsorptive state Protein folding, 56–57 306f
metabolic profile for, 161, 163f misfolding and, 58, 58f, 60
for X linked recessive diseases, 302,
preferred metabolic fuels in, 164t molecular chaperones and, 57
302f
Posttranslational modifications Protein kinases, 132
Red blood cells (RBCs)
of collagen, 62, 63f, 64t Protein malnutrition, marasmus vs.,
in hemolytic anemia, 176
covalent, 61–62 119
metabolic fuel patterns in, 164t
Potassium (K+) levels, insulin and, 246 Protein synthesis. See Translation
Renaturation, of DNA, 10, 10f
PPARs (peroxisome proliferator Protein turnover, amino acid nutrition
RER. See Rough endoplasmic reticulum
activated receptors), 74t, 75 and, 118–119
Response elements, in gluconeogenesis
Prader Willi syndrome, 315, 316 Proteolysis, 61
control, 76–77, 76f
genetic imprinting in, 79, 316f Proton gradient, 193
Resting muscle, metabolic fuel patterns
microdeletions and, 348 Protozoans, 288
in, 164t, 166
39
Immunology
BIOCHEMISTRY AND MEDICAL GENETICS
Biochemistry
Restriction endonucleases, 85–87, 85f, RNAase H, 22, 24f Simvastatin, 231
86f RNA editing, 42 Single gene diseases
sites for, 359 RNA induced silencing complex incomplete penetrance in, 309–310
summarized, 96t (RISC), 95 variable expression in, 308
MedicalGenetRicesstriction fragment cloning RNA interference (RNAi), 95–96, 95f Single gene mutations, 298
restriction endonucleases in, 85–87, RNA polymerases, 20, 20f, 32–33 Single stranded DNA binding protein
85f, 86f in DNA transcription, 33–34, 34f (SSB), 21, 22, 23t
vectors for, 87, 87f eukaryotic, 32, 33t siRNA (small interfering RNA), 95, 96
Restriction fragment length mRNA production and, 36, 38 Sister chromatids (dsDNA)
BehavioralScience/SocialSciencpeoslymorphisms. See RFLPs prokaryotic, 32, 33t in chromosome replication, 18, 18f,
Restriction maps, 88 RNA synthesis, 20, 20f, 33–34, 34f 19f
Retinal rod cell, signal transduction in, DNA synthesis vs., 20t, 21 mitosis and, 12
151, 152f Robertsonian translocations, 341, in S phase of cell cycle, 4
Retroviruses, as gene delivery vector, 346–347, 346f Skeletal muscle
90, 90f, 90t Down syndrome and, 347, 347t glycogen phosphorylase in, 203t
Reverse transcriptase, 23 Rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) glycogen synthase in, 202t
Reverse transcriptase PCR (RT PCR), ribosomes associated with, 57 metabolic fuel patterns in, 164t, 166
110, 110f translation on, 57–61, 58f, 59f removal and excretion of nitrogen
Reverse transcription vitamin K dependent carboxylation from, 259, 260f
cell cycle and, 5 and, 153–154, 154f Small interfering RNA (siRNA), 95,
of mRNA, 88, 88f rRNA. See Ribosomal RNA 96
RFLPs (restriction fragment length RT PCR (reverse transcriptase PCR), Small nuclear RNA (snRNA), 32
polymorphisms), 359 110, 110f Smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER),
in analysis for X linked disease, 375, 232
375f S SNPs (single nucleotide
in analysis of PCR products, 371, Salvage pathways polymorphisms), 359
371f nucleotide synthesis by, 283, 284f snRNA (small nuclear RNA), 32
in genetic testing, 102–103, 102f purine excretion and, 289, 289f Somatic cells, 297
indirect genetic diagnosis using, 374, SAM (S adenosylmethionine), 267 Sonic hedgehog (SHH) gene, mutations
374f Scavenger receptors (SR B1), 226–228 in, 78
on Southern blots, 101, 101f SCID. See X linked severe combined Spectral karyotyping, 351
VNTR sequences and, 102 immunodeficiency S phase (DNA synthesis), in cell cycle,
Rho dependent/independent Scurvy, 64t, 65t, 147 4, 4f
termination, 36 Secretory proteins, synthesis of, 59f chemotherapeutic agents targeting,
Rho (ρ) factor, 32, 33t SER (smooth endoplasmic reticulum), 4
Riboflavin (B2), 147t 232 eukaryotic chromosome replication
Ribonucleic acid. See RNA Sex chromosomes during, 19, 19f
Ribonucleotide reductase, 287, 287t allele frequency and, 328–329 Sphingolipid catabolism, genetic
Ribose 5 phosphate, 283 aneuploidy of, 343 deficiencies of, 248, 248t
Ribosomal RNA (rRNA), 32, 41, 41f SHH (sonic hedgehog) gene, mutations Sphingolipidoses
Ribosomes in, 78 autosomal recessive, 248–249, 248t
composition of, 41, 41f Shiga and Shiga like toxins, 41, 54f, X linked recessive, 249
construction of, 41 55 Sphingolipids, 247
free, 57–61, 58f, 59f Shine Dalgarno sequence, 36, 54f, 55 classification of, 247
peptide bond formation by, 53, 53f Short tandem repeat polymorphisms. synthesis of, 247f
prokaryotic, 36, 41, 41f See STRPs Spinobulbar muscular atrophy, 51t
rough endoplasmic reticulum and, 57 Short tandem repeats (STRs), 104 Splice site mutations, 40, 50
translation on, 57–61, 58f, 59f PCR amplification of, 107–108, 107f Splicing, of eukaryotic pre mRNA
translocation of, 54f, 55 Sickle cell disease transcripts, 40, 40f
Ribozymes, 32 malaria and, 330 SR B1 (scavenger receptors), 226–228
Rifampin, 33t RFLP diagnosis of, 102–103, 102f SSB. See Single stranded DNA binding
Ring chromosome, 349, 350f SIDS (sudden infant death syndrome), protein
RISC (RNA induced silencing 241 STa (E. coli heat stable toxin), 135
complex), 95 Sigma (σ) factor, 32, 33t Starvation (prolonged fast) state, 164
RNA (ribonucleic acid) Signal transduction ketogenolysis in brain during, 245,
processing of, 32–42 (See also G proteins in, 139, 139t 245f
specific RNA entries) hormones and, 131 preferred metabolic fuels in, 164t
summarized, 43t in retinal rod cell, 151, 152f Statins, as enzyme inhibitors, 122, 231,
types of, 32 Silent mutations, 49f 23
394
INDEX
Stem cells, in gene replacement therapy, Transfer RNA (tRNA), 32, 41–42, 42f Unlinked genes and markers, 360,
92f and amino acid activation, 51–52, 52f 361f
Steroid receptors, 74t aminoacyl, codon translation by, Unsaturated fatty acids, 217
Stress, lipolysis of triglyceride in 51–52, 52f Upstream promotor elements, 72f, 73
response to, 237, 238f Transfused blood, 179 Uracil, 263
STRPs (short tandem repeat Transition mutation, 49 Urea, synthesis of, 262
polymorphisms), 359 Translation, 3, 47 genetic deficiencies of, 263, 263t
indirect genetic diagnosis using, 373, amino acid activation for, 51–52, 52f Urea cycle, 260f, 262–263, 262f
373f amino acids for, tRNA and, 41–42, 42f genetic deficiencies of, 263, 263t
STRs. See Short tandem repeats on free ribosomes, 57–61, 58f, 59f Uric acid, excessive, 290
Structural chromosome abnormalities, inhibitors of, 56 Uridine monophosphate (UMP), 6f
345–347 modifications after (See Urobilinogen, 270, 274
Submetacentric chromosomes, 341 Posttranslational modifications)
Substrate phosphorylation, 176 peptide bond formation during, V
Subunit assembly, protein, 56–57 52–53, 53f Variable number of tandem repeat
Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), on rough endoplasmic reticulum, sequences. see VNTR sequences
241 57–61, 58f, 59f Vectors
Supercoiling, DNA, 10–11 steps in, 53–54, 54f for recombinant DNA and cloning,
summarized, 65t summarized, 96t
T Translocation(s), 345–347 restriction fragment cloning using,
involving oncogenes, 346 87, 87f
Tandem repeats, variable number of,
of ribosomes, 54f, 55 Verotoxin, 41
359
Robertsonian (See Robertsonian Very low density lipoprotein. See
TATA box, 36, 38
translocations) VLDL
Tay Sachs disease, 248t
Translocation carrier, 345–346 Vibrio cholerae exotoxin, ADP
TCAG, 7, 8f
Transport kinetics, 124 ribosylation by, 139, 139t
Telecrine hormones, 131
Transversion mutation, 49 Viral load, measuring, in AIDS patients,
Telomerase, 22–23
Triglyceride(s), 220 110, 110f
Termination step (release factors), in
glycerophospholipids and, 221, 221f Viruses, as gene delivery vector, 90–91,
translation, 54f, 55
lipolysis of, 237, 238f 91f, 91t
summarized, 65t
synthesis of, 220–221, 221f Vision, vitamin A and, 151, 152f
Tetrahydrobiopterin (THB, BH4),
Trinucleotide repeat expansion, 50, 51t Vitamin A (carotene), 148t
267
Triple repeat expansions, diseases deficiency, 148, 153
Tetrahydrofolate (THF), 267, 268f
showing anticipation associated toxicity, 153
Tetraploidy, 342
with, 313t vision and, 151, 152f
Thalassemia, 40, 50
Triploidy, 342 Vitamin B1 (thiamine), 146t, 185
THB (tetrahydrobiopterin, BH4), 267
Trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome), 343 Vitamin B2 (riboflavin), 147t
THF (tetrahydrofolate), 267, 268f
Trisomy 18 (Edward syndrome), 342 Vitamin B3 (niacin), 146t, 147, 237
Thiamine (B1), 146t, 185
Trisomy 21 (Down syndrome), 342 Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine), 147t
Thiazide diuretics, 290
maternal age and, 344 deficiency, 271, 272t
Thymidylate synthase, 287t
Robertsonian translocation and, 347, Vitamin B12 (cobalamin) deficiency,
Thymine dimer repair, 25, 25t, 26f
347t 268
Tissue, removal and excretion of amino
tRNA. See Transfer RNA folate deficiency vs., 269t
groups from, 259, 260f
Troponin I and Troponin T, 194 orotic aciduria and, 285
Tissue hypoxia, 194
Tumor lysis syndrome, 290 propionic acid pathway and,
α Tocopherol. See Vitamin E
Tumor suppressor genes, and DNA 242, 243f
Topoisomerases, 10
repair, 25 Vitamin C (ascorbate) deficiency, 147t
prokaryotic (DNA gyrase), 22, 23
Turner syndrome, 343 See also Scurvy
trans regulatory element, 73
Tyrosine kinase, 136–137, 137f vitamin K deficiency vs., 155t
Transaminases, 261
Vitamin D
Transcription, 3, 31, 31f, 33–34, 34f
summarized, 43t U calcium homeostasis and, 148
deficiency, 148, 150
Transcription factors, 32 Ubiquitin, 58
function of, 148t
in eukaryotic gene expression UDP glucuronyl transferase
synthesis and activation of,
regulation, 73f, 74–75 deficiency, 275
148, 149f
general, 74–75 in newborns, 56
toxicity, 150
specific, 74t, 75 UMP (uridine monophosphate), 6f
Vitamin E (α tocopherol), 148t, 156
trans fatty acids, 218 Uncouplers, 195
deficiency, 148
Transferrin, 272 Uniparental disomy, 79, 315
role in LDL oxidation, 228
39
Immunology
BIOCHEMISTRY AND MEDICAL GENETICS
Biochemistry
Vitamin K, 148t W Xeroderma pigmentosum, 26, 27
anticoagulant therapy and, 156 X linked dominant inheritance,
Warfarin, 156
carboxylation dependent on, 305–306, 306f
Water soluble hormones, 131
153–154, 154f diseases associated with, 306
cAMP/cGMP, PIP2 second messenger
MedicalGeneticsdeficiency, 154–155, 155t X linked recessive inheritance,
systems, and, 134–135, 134f, 135f
Vitamins 301–302, 302f
G protein and, 133, 133f
See also specific vitamins diseases associated with, 302, 375
insulin receptor and, 136–137, 137f
homocysteinemia caused by X inactivation in, 303, 304f
protein kinase activation by, 132
deficiencies in, 266 X linked severe combined
Water soluble vitamins, 145, 146t–147t
BehavioralScience/SocialSlipciiednces soluble, 148, 148t immunodeficiency (SCID), 90
Watson Crick DNA, 9, 9f
water soluble, 145, 146t–147t ex vivo gene replacement therapy for,
Well fed (absorptive) state, metabolic
VLDL (very low density lipoprotein), 94f
profile for, 161, 162f
223–225, 223t, 224f XP gene, in DNA repair, 26f
Wernicke Korsakoff syndrome, 185
metabolism of, 224f
Williams syndrome, 348
remnants (See IDL [intermediate Y
Wilms tumor, 348
density lipoprotein]) Y chromosome, 297, 305
Wood alcohol poisoning, 123
VNTR (variable number of tandem
Z
repeat) sequences, 359 X
RFLPs and, 102 Zellweger syndrome, 75
X chromosome, 297
Von Gierke disease, 203t, 204, 213 Zidovudine (AZT), 23
inactivation of, 303, 304f
Zinc protoporphyrin, 272
39






