This patient developed fever, headache, myalgia, and a maculopapular rash while camping in
the Appalachian Mountains, raising strong suspicion for Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever
(RMSF). The causative pathogen is Rickettsia rickettsii, a weakly gram-negative, obligate
intracellular bacterium. Transmission occurs following a tick bite from specific tick vectors
(eg, American dog tick) present in the eastern and south-central United States and
mountainous regions west of the Mississippi River.

R rickettsii moves from the tick salivary glands to the human host after 6-12 hours of
attachment. The pathogen enters vascular endothelial cells via endocytosis and subsequently
lyses the endosome using specific virulence factors. It then replicates in the cytosol and
nucleus of the host cell and spreads rapidly to adjacent cells via filopodia, leading to a
lymphohistiocytic vasculitis.
2.
Manifestations begin with fever, headache, myalgia, and malaise followed 3-5 days later by a
characteristic macular rash that becomes petechial over time. The rash typically begins on
the ankles or wrists and spreads toward the center of the body (centripetally) as well as to the
palms and soles. Thrombocytopenia frequently occurs as platelets are consumed due to
widespread vascular injury. Antibiotic therapy is required to prevent progression and,
potentially, death. First-line therapy is doxycycline, which inhibits protein synthesis by
binding the 30s bacterial ribosomal subunit.
3.
Educational objective:
Rocky mountain spotted fever is a tick-borne illness due to Rickettsia rickettsii, a weakly gram-
negative, obligate intracellular organism that has an affinity for vascular endothelial cells.
Patients usually have nonspecific symptoms (eg, fever, malaise, myalgia) followed by a
macular-petechial rash that begins on the ankles and wrists and spreads to the center of the
body as well as to the palms and soles. Urgent treatment with doxycycline, an inhibitor of
bacterial protein synthesis, is required.
