1.

The patient had impetigo, a skin infection caused by Staphylococcus aureus and less
commonly by Streptococcus pyogenes (Group A streptococci [GAS]). Her facial puffiness
(likely due to sodium and water retention and possibly proteinuria) and hematuria (likely due to
nephritis) suggest post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis. Staphylococcal infection is not
complicated by glomerulonephritis, so S pyogenes is the most likely causative organism of her
symptoms.

2.
Acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis
* Can be asymptomatic
Clinical © If symptomatic: ;
features o Gross hematuria (tea- or cola-colored urine)
o Edema (periorbital, generalized)
o Hypertension
« Urinalysis: + protein, + blood, + red blood cell casts
° Serum:
Laboratory © | C3 & possible | C4
findings © + Serum creatinine
o 7 Anti-DNase B & t AHase
o ASO & f anti-NAD (from preceding pharyngitis)

AHase = antihyaluronidase; anti-DNase B = antideoxyribonuclease-B; ASO =
antistreptolysin O; anti-NAD = antinicotinamide-adenine dinucleotidase.

3.
Nonsuppurative complications of GAS infections include acute rheumatic fever (ARF) and
glomerulonephritis, thought to be due to the formation of different anti-streptococcal antibodies
that cross-react with heart tissue or result in immune complex deposition in the kidney.
Glomerulonephritis is associated with prior streptococcal pharyngeal or skin infection (eg,
cellulitis, impetigo, erysipelas); ARF is associated with prior streptococcal pharyngitis but not
skin infection. Previous streptococcal infection is evidenced by elevated streptococcal
antibodies (anti-streptolysin, anti-DNaseB, and anti-hyaluronidase).

S pyogenes are catalase-negative, B-hemolytic, gram-positive cocci in chains. S pyogenes is
unique among B-hemolytic streptococci as it is susceptible to bacitracin. Because the
bacitracin test is not very specific for S pyogenes, it has been replaced in many laboratories by
the pyrrolidonyl arylamidase (PYR) test; S pyogenes is PYR-positive.
4.
Educational objective:
Glomerulonephritis is associated with prior streptococcal pharyngeal or skin infection; acute
rheumatic fever is associated with prior streptococcal pharyngitis but not skin infection.
Streptococci are catalase-negative, staphylococci are catalase-positive. Streptococcus
pyogenes (Group A Streptococcus) is B-hemolytic, bacitracin-susceptible, and pyrrolidonyl
arylamidase-positive. Streptococcus pneumoniae is bile-soluble and optochin-susceptible.
