1.
This patient has high fever, cough, leukocytosis, and a right lung infiltrate indicating lobar
pneumonia. Lobar pneumonia is most commonly caused by extracellular bacterial pathogens
such as Haemophilus influenzae, Staphylococcus aureus, and Streptococcus

pneumoniae (Choices A, D, and E). The immune response to extracellular organisms is
primarily mediated by neutrophils early in infection and by the humoral antibody response (B
lymphocytes, immunoglobulins, complement) as time goes on.

In this case, components of the cell-mediated immune response were primarily involved in
controlling the infection, suggesting that the pneumonia was most likely due to an intracellular
pathogen such as Legionella pneumophila (a common cause of atypical community-
acquired pneumonia). Intracellular pathogens are phagocytosed by macrophages but are
initially resistant to destruction due to the presence of virulence factors that inhibit phagosome-
lysosome fusion (eg, Legionella) or phagolysosome acidification (eg, Mycobacteria
tuberculosis), or allow bacteria to escape from the phagolysosome (eg, Listeria
monocytogenes).

2.

Legionella and other intracellular pathogens that initially replicate within the phagosome
eventually undergo some degree of digestion by lysosomes, leading to the display of bacterial
antigens on major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class || molecules. This stimulates naive
CD4 T lymphocytes to differentiate into T-helper subtype 1 (Th1) cells. Th1 cells release
interferon-gamma, which activates macrophages and allows them to form fully mature
(acidified) phagolysosomes capable of efficiently killing the intracellular bacteria. Th1 cells
also release interleukin-2, which activates and expands the population of naive T cells, Th1
cells, and memory T cells.

3.

Class I MHC pathway Class ll MHC pathway

Educational objective:

Intracellular bacterial organisms such as Legionella pneumophila are primarily countered by
the cell-mediated immune response. Intracellular pathogens that replicate within phagosomes
(eg, Legionella, Mycobacterium tuberculosis) trigger activation and differentiation of T-helper
subtype 1 cells with subsequent macrophage activation via interferon-gamma.
